HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1054
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Act 51, Session Laws of Hawaii 2004, as amended by Act 221, Session Laws of Hawaii 2004, required the implementation of a new allocation method, the weighted student formula, to distribute funds to schools based on the characteristics of the students.  Act 51, as amended, also created the committee on weights whose responsibility is to recommend a formula and various weights of characteristics to the board of education.  With six years of experience, it has become apparent that, to provide stability and predictability for the principals and the school community councils, an improved practice would be to have the committee on weights meet every odd-numbered year rather than each year.  Schools that are developing academic and financial plans to improve student achievement need to be assured of constant funding over a two‑year period.
          The purpose of this Act is to provide that the committee on weights will meet every odd-numbered year.
     SECTION 2.  Section 302A-1303.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
          "(a)  There is established within the department of education the committee on weights to develop a weighted student formula pursuant to section 302A-1303.6.  The committee shall:
     (1)  Create a list of student characteristics that will be weighted;
     (2)  Create a system of weights based upon the student characteristics that may be applied to determine the relative cost of educating any student;
     (3)  Determine specific student weights, including their unit value;
     (4)  Determine which moneys shall be included in the amount of funds to be allocated through the weighted student formula;
     (5)  Recommend a weighted student formula to the board of education;
     (6)  Perform any other function that may facilitate the implementation of the weighted student formula; and
     (7)  Meet not less than [annually] biennially, every odd‑numbered year, to review the weighted student formula and, if the committee deems it necessary, recommend a new weighted student formula for adoption by the board of education."
     SECTION 3.  Section 302A-1303.6, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§302A-1303.6 Weighted student formula.  Based upon recommendations from the committee on weights, the board of education, not less than [annually,] biennially, shall adopt a weighted student formula for the allocation of moneys to public schools that takes into account the educational needs of each student.  The department, upon the receipt of appropriated moneys, shall use the weighted student formula to allocate funds to public schools.  Principals shall expend moneys provided to the principals' schools.  This section shall only apply to charter schools for fiscal years in which the charter schools elect pursuant to section 302B-13 to receive allocations according to the weighted student formula."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Committee on Weights; Weighted Student Formula
 
Description:
Amends Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to require the Committee on Weights to meet not less than once every odd-numbered year
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
