HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1084
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR SPECIAL FUND.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 26, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§26-  Lieutenant governor special fund.  (a)  There is established in the state treasury the lieutenant governor special fund, into which shall be deposited all revenues from name change fees, apostille and certification fees, and copy fees.
     (b)  Moneys in the lieutenant governor special fund shall be used for the administration and operation of the functions of the lieutenant governor as provided in section 26-1(a)."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 92, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§92-    Lieutenant governor; fees.  The lieutenant governor shall charge the following fees which shall be deposited to the lieutenant governor special fund:
     (1)  For signing an apostille or certification, $10;
     (2)  For preparing every photostat copy of any document on record in the lieutenant governor's office, 50 cents per page or portion thereof; and
     (3)  For all other acts and duties, the fees of which are not otherwise provided for, such charges as the lieutenant governor may from time to time prescribe."
     SECTION 3.  Section 91-2.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, each agency may charge up to a maximum fee of ten cents per page, plus the actual costs of mailing, for the reproduction of paper copies of the following:
     (1)  Proposed and final rules, whether new rules, amended rules, or repealed rules, in any format; and
     (2)  Notices of proposed rulemaking actions pursuant to section
This section shall not apply to the reproduction by the office of the lieutenant governor of other agencies' rules, kept in the general collection of the office of the lieutenant governor.  Charges for the reproduction of paper copies of rules in the general collection of the office of the lieutenant governor shall be as stated in section [92-21] 92-   ."
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $80,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012, to carry out the purposes of this Act, including the hiring of necessary staff.  The sum appropriated shall be deposited into the Lieutenant Governor Special Fund and shall expended by the office of the lieutenant governor.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the Lieutenant Governor Special Fund the sum of $80,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 to carry out the purposes of this Act, including the hiring of necessary staff.  The sum appropriated shall be expended by the office of the lieutenant governor.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Establishes lieutenant governor's special fund
 
Description:
Establishes a special fund in the lieutenant governor's office and provides that all revenue from name changes, apostille and certification fees, and copy fees be deposited into the fund
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
