HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1017
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO BIOFUELS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to expand the applicability of the renewable energy facility siting process to include biofuel production facilities and distribution infrastructure with capacity to produce or distribute one hundred thousand gallons or more of biofuel annually.
     SECTION 2.  The legislature finds that the renewable energy facility siting process serves to encourage the expeditious permitting and development of renewable energy facilities in Hawaii.  The renewable energy facility siting process accomplishes this by coordinating the relevant state and county permitting agencies and collecting fees from permit applicants to reimburse state and county agency costs to process the necessary project permits within twelve months following final acceptance of the required Chapter 343, Hawaii Revised Statutes ("Environmental Impact Statements"), document.  To date, only one project has utilized the renewable energy facility siting process; however, at least four other projects statewide have applied for, or intend to apply for, participation in the renewable energy facility siting process.  Many other developers and government agencies have expressed interest in the renewable energy facility siting process.
     To help meet our State′s clean energy goals, the State′s utilities will need adequate infrastructure in place to transport, distribute, and store large amounts of biofuels in Hawaii including inter-island transport.  Facilitating the permitting of such infrastructure will enable the State′s utilities to immediately increase their biofuel demand, which in turn should encourage more supply from local biofuel producers.
     Currently, only biofuel producers with capacity to produce one million gallons or more of biofuel annually are eligible for the renewable energy facility siting process.  Due to emerging biofuel technologies, most biofuel projects currently under development or planning in Hawaii are small scale, pilot projects, some with capacity to produce only one hundred thousand gallons or more annually.  The success of these pilot facilities is critical to Hawaii's clean energy independence as they are a precursor to the demonstration and commercial scale phases of development.
     The inclusion of biofuel production facilities and biofuel distribution infrastructure with capacity to produce or distribute one hundred thousand gallons or more of biofuel annually will further the State′s interest in reducing Hawaii′s over-dependence on imported fossil fuels and meet Hawaii's energy self-sufficiency goals and mandates, and will encourage the timely development of renewable energy projects that utilize Hawaii′s indigenous renewable energy resources for the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Hawaii.
     SECTION 3.  Section 201N-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending the definition of "renewable energy facility" or "facility" to read as follows:
     ""Renewable energy facility" or "facility" means a new facility located in the State with the capacity to produce from renewable energy at least two hundred megawatts of electricity; provided that an electricity production facility with a capability between five megawatts and one hundred ninety-nine megawatts of electricity and a biofuel production facility or distribution infrastructure with a capacity to produce or distribute one [million] hundred thousand gallons or more annually may apply to the coordinator for designation as a renewable energy facility.  The term includes any of the following associated with the initial permitting and construction of the facility:
     (1)  The land parcel on which the facility is situated;
     (2)  Any renewable energy production structure or equipment;
     (3)  Any energy transmission line from the facility to a public utility's electricity transmission or distribution system;
     (4)  Any on-site infrastructure; and
     (5)  Any on-site building, structure, other improvement, or equipment necessary for the production of electricity or biofuel from the renewable energy site, transmission of the electricity or biofuel, or any accommodation for employees of the facility."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________BY REQUEST
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Renewable Energy Facility Siting Process; Biofuel Production Facilities and Distribution Infrastructure with Capacity to Produce or Distribute One Hundred Thousand Gallons of Biofuel Annually
 
Description:
Modifies the renewable energy facility siting process to include biofuel production facilities and distribution infrastructure with capacity to produce or distribute one hundred thousand gallons or more of biofuel annually.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
