HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1073
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII HEALTH SYSTEMS CORPORATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1. The legislature finds that the Hawaii health systems corporation is the fourth largest public hospital system in the nation and operates public health care facilities that provide essential safety-net hospital and long-term care services throughout the State.  Due to rapid change taking place in the health care industry and the impending implementation of national health care reform, the legislature acknowledges that the corporation's governing board of directors (board) must have the appropriate flexibility and autonomy needed for the community hospitals to compete and remain viable.
     The current board includes the five regional chief executive officers serving as ex-officio, voting members.  The regional chief executive officers have been instrumental in bringing additional expertise to the board during the time of transition from a single corporation board to a multi-level board system.  In light of the successful establishment of the regional system boards, the significant challenges imposed by an ever-changing and complex health care environment, the time required to serve on the corporate board, and the desire for additional community participation, the legislature finds it appropriate to replace the regional chief executive officers on the board with community members from each of the regional systems.  The regional chief executive officers will continue to participate in the corporation's board meetings, along with the president and chief executive officer, as invited staff.
     In addition, the director of health is currently an ex-officio, nonvoting member of the board.  In order to increase the input of the administration and further the implementation of public health policies, the director of health will be given voting rights.  In order to create an uneven number of board members for voting purposes, an additional member shall be appointed by the Governor and serve as an at-large member.
     The purpose of this Act is to affirm the State's commitment to provide quality health care for the people of our State, by amending the corporation's board structure in line with considerations consistent with the provisions of Act 290, Session Laws of Hawaii(SLH) 2007, and Act 182, SLH 2009, while improving the accountability and sustainability of the health system. The proposed amendments will build on the excellent progress made by the regional systems to coordinate service delivery and improve the health of the island communities.  The corporation's new board structure will support clear and consistent roles for all regional systems and create a more balanced multi-board tiered system.  Equally important, the amendments will create an opportunity for more participation on the board by community members, and enable them to strengthen the board's focus on quality care and services responsive to the needs of their communities.  The amendments will enable the health system to move forward as a region-focused health system, thereby advancing the delivery of health care services, improving flexibility, and promoting collaboration with other health service organizations.
     SECTION 2.  Section 323F-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsections (a) and (b) to read as follows:
     "(a)  The corporation shall be governed by a [twelve-member] thirteen-member board of directors that shall carry out the duties and responsibilities of the corporation other than those duties and responsibilities relating to the establishment of any captive insurance company pursuant to section 323F-7 (c)(20) and the operation thereof.
     (b) The members of the corporation board shall be
appointed as follows:
     (1)  The director of health as an ex-officio, [nonvoting] voting member;
    [(2)  The five regional chief executive officers as ex-officio, voting members; and]
    [(3)] (2)_[ Two] Three members who reside in the county of Maui who shall be appointed by the Maui regional system board;
    [(4)] (3)  [One member] Two members who [resides] reside in the eastern section of the county of Hawaii who shall be appointed by the East Hawaii regional system board;
    [(5)] (4)  [One member] Two members who [resides] reside in the western section of the county of Hawaii who shall be appointed by the West Hawaii regional system board;
     (5)  One member who shall be appointed by the Governor, and serve as an at-large member.
     (6)  [One member] Two members who [resides] reside on the island of Kauai who shall be appointed by the Kauai regional system board; and
     (7)  [One member] Two members who [resides] reside on the island of Oahu who shall be appointed by the Oahu regional system board.
     The appointed board members residing in the county of Maui, eastern section of the county of Hawaii, western section of the county of Hawaii, county of Kauai and city and county of Honolulu, shall serve for a term of four years; provided that the terms of the initial appointments shall be as follows:  one of the initial members from the county of Maui shall be appointed to serve a term of two years and the other two members shall be appointed to serve a term of four years[;]each; the initial member from East Hawaii shall be appointed to serve a term of two years; the initial member from West Hawaii shall be appointed to serve a term of four years; the initial member from the island of Kauai shall be appointed to serve a term of two years; and the initial member from the island of Oahu shall be appointed to serve a term of four years.  The at-large member appointed by the Governor shall serve a term of two years.
     Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner provided for the original appointments.  The corporation board shall elect its own chair from among its members.  Appointments to the corporation board shall be as representative as possible of the system's stakeholders as outlined in this subsection."
     (c)  The selection, appointment, and confirmation of any nominee shall be based on ensuring that board members have diverse and beneficial perspectives and experiences and that they include, to the extent possible, representatives of the medical, business, management, law, finance, and health sectors, and patients or consumers.  Members of the board shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses, including travel expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
     (d)  Any member of the board may be removed for cause by vote of a two-thirds majority of the board's members then in office.  For purposes of this section, cause shall include without limitation:
     (1)  Malfeasance in office;
     (2)  Failure to attend regularly called meetings;
     (3)  Sentencing for conviction of a felony, to the extent allowed by section 831-2; or
     (4)  Any other cause that may render a member incapable or unfit to discharge the duties required under this chapter.
Filing nomination papers for elective office or appointment to elective office, or conviction of a felony consistent with section 831-3.1, shall automatically and immediately disqualify a board member from office."
     SECTION 3.   Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.   This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii Health Systems Corporation; Board of Directors
 
Description:
Amends corporation board composition to add an at-large member appointed by the Governor, give voting rights to the ex-officio Director of Health member, and replace the regional chief executive officer ex-officio voting members with community members from the respective regional system boards.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
