HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
102
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that a shortage of school supplies for the classroom and funds to purchase those supplies has been an ongoing problem for many years.  The legislature believes that to properly address this problem, a school's purchasing power should be concentrated at the classroom level through the use of debit cards.  Debit cards would allow teachers to make specific purchases within a set dollar limit.
     The benefits of a debit card system include:
     (1)  Streamlining the reimbursement process for teachers who purchase necessary school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies; and
     (2)  Providing teachers with purchasing flexibility to take advantage of school discounts and sales in the community.
     The legislature further finds that there are banks that can assist with the establishment of debit card system accounts at little or no cost that provide up-to-date spending information.
     The purpose of this Act is to allow the principal of each public school to establish and use a debit card system based at the individual school level to purchase school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Purchases of supplies; debit card system.  The principal of each public school may establish and use a debit card system, based at the individual school level to enable teachers at that school to purchase school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies; provided that the system is consistent with the school's academic and financial plans."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, to implement a debit card system based at the individual school level to purchase school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies pursuant to section 302A‑   , Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Education; School Supplies; Debit Card System; Appropriation
 
Description:
Allows the principal of each public school to establish and use a debit card system based at the individual school level to enable teachers at that school to purchase school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies.  Provides an appropriation for FY 2011-2012 and FY 2012-2013.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
