HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1154
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO NATIVE HAWAIIANS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that, over the past two hundred years, Hawai‘i has seen and experienced severe changes. These changes include the deterioration of the Hawaiian culture, language, values, and land tenure system, which have in part resulted in the over-development of the coastline, alteration of fresh water streams, destruction of life-giving watersheds, decimation of the coral reefs, and the decline of endemic marine and terrestrial species.
     Native Hawaiian culture has knowledge that has been passed on for generations, and still living for the purpose of perpetuating traditional protocols, caring for and protecting the environment, and strengthening cultural and spiritual connections.  It is through the ‘aha moku councils that native Hawaiians protected their environment and sustained the abundance of resources that they depended upon for thousands of years.
     Today, many Hawaiian communities are becoming revitalized by using the knowledge of cultural practitioners that was passed down through kupuna, and experienced farmers (mahi‘ai) and fishers (lawai‘a) to engage and enhance sustainability, subsistence, and self-sufficiency.  Furthermore, many Hawaiian communities are interested, concerned, involved, willing, and able to advise government agencies, organizations, and other interested groups in integrating traditional knowledge and ahupua‘a management practices.
     The legislature further finds that on August 15-17, 2006, the Ho‘ohanohano I Na Kupuna Puwalu series began and native Hawaiian cultural and traditional practitioners who are versed in lawai‘a and mahi‘ai, ocean, and land ahupua‘a methods gathered to discuss and bring forth the wisdom of the kupuna and ancestors.  It was a gathering of empirical knowledge handed down from generation to generation on traditional fishing, agriculture, streams, fishponds, and land use methodology based on the ahupua‘a system.  Representatives from thirty-seven moku in the State and over one hundred ahupua‘a practitioners, including kupuna and the acknowledged traditional experts of each moku, all joined together to come forth with their mana‘o and concerns.
     The conclusion of Puwalu Ekahi called for the creation of a resolution calling on native Hawaiians to begin a process to uphold and continue Hawaiian traditional land and ocean practices.  Perpetuating and preserving the knowledge of the practitioners through the continuation of the konohiki management, the kapu system, and the creation of an ‘aha moku and the ahupua‘a management system was the consensus of Puwalu Ekahi.
     On November 8 and 9, 2006, Puwalu ‘Elua brought together educators, administrators, cultural practitioners, and kupuna to discuss the values and the spiritual connection between natural resources and native Hawaiians; the ahupua‘a concept; generational knowledge and learning; the importance of place names and mo‘olelo; seasonal closures and lunar calendars; fishing practices; the Northwest Hawaiian islands; konohiki connections; marine protected areas; ‘upena (nets); place-based kapu; limu; and pu‘uhonua concepts that could be developed as an educational framework to integrate this knowledge into a curricula for all public, private, charter, and Hawaiian immersion schools in Hawai‘i.
     On December 19 and 20, 2006, Puwalu ‘Elua brought together major policymakers and stakeholders involved in the protection of the Hawai‘i ecosystem.  Native Hawaiian practitioners and experts in traditional methods of sustainability, government policymakers, including members of the legislature, state agency directors, environmental groups, educational leaders, and Hawaiian community organizations, discussed existing programs and their successes and failures in community-building.  In conclusion, it was agreed that statutes, ordinances, and a framework for community consultation using the Hawaiian perspective and traditional methods such as the ahupua‘a management system are needed, and the ‘aha moku councils should be established.
     Between 2006 and 2010, three more puwalu were convened to gather additional community input on best practices in the area of native Hawaiian resource management.  All puwalu were open to the public and included farmers, fishers, environmentalists, educators, organizations and agencies, and governmental representatives who, through discussions on the integration of these practices into regulation and common utilization, came to the consensus of the necessity of integrating the ‘aha moku system into government policy.  The information gathered from all puwalu has been compiled into a comprehensive report to the legislature as required by Act 212, Session Laws of Hawaii 2007.
     The purpose of this Act is to formally recognize the ‘aha moku system and to create an ‘aha kiole commission, to be located within the department of land and natural resources, to serve in an advisory capacity to the governor.  The ‘aha kiole commission will advise the governor on issues related to land and natural resource management through the ‘aha moku system, a system of best practices that is based upon the indigenous resource management practices of moku (regional) boundaries, which acknowledges the natural contours of land, the specific resources located within those areas, and the methodology necessary to sustain resources and the community.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established the ‘aha kiole commission to be placed within the department of land and natural resources for administrative purposes as provided in section 26-35, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The commission shall advise the governor in carrying out the purposes of this Act.  The commission shall consist of eight members selected by the ‘aha moku councils of the respective islands without regard to sections 26-34 and 78-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The commission members shall select the chairperson of the commission from amongst its members.  The members shall not receive compensation for their service but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their duties under this Act.
     (b)  The commission shall:
     (1)  Provide advisory input based upon the indigenous resource management practices of each moku to state and county agencies;
     (2)  Aid in the implementation of a comprehensive set of best practices for natural resource management;
     (3)  Foster the understanding and practical use of knowledge, including native Hawaiian methodology and expertise;
     (4)  Ensure the future sustainable use of the State's marine, land, cultural, agricultural, and natural resources;
     (5)  Enhance community education and cultural awareness;
     (6)  Participate in the protection and preservation of the State's natural resources;
     (7)  Engage in discussion with and participate in meetings and events held by the various moku statewide;
     (8)  Establish an administrative structure that oversees the ‘aha moku system; and
     (9)  Select an executive director.
     (c)  The commission shall submit an annual report to the governor and legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular legislative session, starting with the 2012 regular session.  The annual report shall include a list of all recommendations made by the commission and the resulting action taken by state and county agencies over the course of the year.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $         or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the administrative costs related to carrying out the duties of the ‘aha kiole commission. 
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of land and natural resources for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________

Report Title:
‘Aha Kiole Advisory Commission
 
Description:
Establishes the ‘Aha Kiole Advisory Commission placed within the Department of Land and Natural Resources to serve in an advisory capacity to the governor on all matters regarding the management of the State's land and natural resources.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
