HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1113
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 11-355, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§11-355[]]  Contributions by state and county contractors, subcontractors, contract bidders, and applicants for and recipients of grants and subsidies prohibited.  (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who enters into any contract with the State, any of the counties, or any department or agency thereof, or any person who is subcontracted under that contract, either for the rendition of personal services, the buying of property, or the furnishing of any material, supplies, or equipment to the State, any of the counties, any department or agency thereof, or for the selling of any land or building to the State, any of the counties, or any department or agency thereof, if payment for the performance of the contract or payment for the material, supplies, equipment, land, property, or building is to be made in whole or in part from funds appropriated by the legislative body, at any time between the execution of the contract through the completion of the contract, to:
     (1)  Directly or indirectly make any contribution, or promise expressly or impliedly to make any contribution to any candidate committee or noncandidate committee, or to any candidate or to any person for any political purpose or use; or
     (2)  Knowingly solicit any contribution from any person for any purpose during any period.
     (b)  It shall be unlawful, from the time a solicitation is issued under section 103D-302, 103D-304, 103D-305, 103D-306, or 103D‑307 until a contract is entered into, for a person who submits an offer for a solicitation to:
     (1)  Directly or indirectly make any contribution or to promise expressly or impliedly to make any contribution to any political party, committee, or candidate or to any person for any political purpose or use; or
     (2)  Knowingly solicit any contribution from any person for any purpose during any period.
     (c)  It shall be unlawful for any applicant for or recipient of any grant or subsidy administered under chapter 42F, at any time between the submission of the grant or subsidy application through the completion or expiration of the grant or subsidy award, to:
     (1)  Directly or indirectly make any contribution to or promise expressly or impliedly to make any contribution to any political party, committee, or candidate or to any person for any political purpose or use; or
     (2)  Knowingly solicit any contribution from any person for any purpose during any period.
     [(b)] (d)  Except as provided in [subsection] subsections (a), (b), and (c), this section does not prohibit or make unlawful the establishment or administration of, or the solicitation of contributions to, any noncandidate committee by any person other than the state or county contractor, subcontractor, contract bidder, or applicant for or recipient of grants and subsidies for the purpose of influencing the nomination for election, or the election of any person to office.
     [(c)] (e)  For purposes of this section, "completion of the contract" means that the parties to the government contract have either terminated the contract prior to completion of performance or fully performed the duties and obligations under the contract, no disputes relating to the performance and payment remain under the contract, and all disputed claims have been adjudicated and are final.  Additionally, for purposes of this section, the terms "applicant", "recipient" and "person" include members of boards of directors and officers of an entity making or soliciting a campaign contribution, or any lobbyist acting on their behalf."
     SECTION 2.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Campaign Contributions; State Contracts
 
Description:
Prohibits persons soliciting a state contract or applicants for or recipients of state grants or subsidies awarded under chapter 42F from making campaign contributions and also includes subcontractors to a state contract in the prohibition of campaign contributions to a political party, committee, or candidate.
 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
