HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1181
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO GOVERNMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the State's recent budget shortfall and ongoing economic concerns make it necessary to evaluate state departments, programs, and services to determine those that are no longer necessary and that may be eliminated or consolidated.
     The purpose of this Act is to streamline state government by creating a nonpartisan committee to identify state programs, agencies, practices, and services that should be discontinued or consolidated.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is created the program realignment and closure committee.  The committee shall consist of the following members:
     (1)  The governor or the governor's designee, who shall serve as the chair of the committee;
     (2)  Two members of the senate to be selected by the senate president from among the members of the majority party;
     (3)  One member of the senate to be selected by the senate president from the minority party;
     (4)  Two members of the house of representatives to be selected by the speaker of the house of representatives from among the members of the majority party;
     (5)  Two members of the house of representatives to be selected by the speaker of the house of representatives from among the members of the minority party;
     (6)  The directors of each state department or the directors' designees, who shall serve as ex officio nonvoting members;
     (7)  The chief justice of the supreme court or the chief justice's designee;
     (8)  The president of the University of Hawaii or the president's designee, who shall serve as an ex officio nonvoting member; and
     (9)  The chairperson of the board of trustees of the office of Hawaiian affairs or the chairperson's designee.
     (b)  The program realignment and closure committee shall review the current organization and operation of state government and make recommendations on programs, agencies, practices, or services that may be eliminated or consolidated in order to make state government function and deliver services more efficiently.
     (c)  The program realignment and closure committee shall submit its report and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.  During the 2013 regular session, the legislature shall review each recommendation of the committee and shall vote to accept or reject the recommendation; provided that the legislature shall accept or reject the recommendation in its entirety.
     (d)  The program realignment and closure committee shall be dissolved on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
By Request
 

 
Report Title:
Government; Efficiency; Program Realignment and Closure Committee
 
Description:
Creates the program realignment and closure committee to recommend state programs that should be discontinued or consolidated.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
