HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1115
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ELECTIONS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that in 2008, the nomination process for elective office ended in chaos and controversy.  When a last minute candidacy in the Honolulu mayoral campaign was announced, it resulted in an available city council seat.  In the race to file nomination papers for the city council seat, a state representative seat was made available just before the filing deadline.  News accounts told of people obtaining nomination papers for the state representative seat within thirty minutes of the filing deadline.  Candidates scrambled to find signatures for nomination papers and the elections office was in such upheaval that state Democratic party leaders intervened to persuade officials to allow candidates to collect signatures and file nomination papers as the filing deadline was imminent.  The State's chief election officer later invalidated the candidacy for the city council seat that was one of the major causes of the confusion.  After that candidacy was invalidated, the city clerk felt compelled to seek the advice and counsel of the city ethics commission to improve procedures and ensure that the clerk's office remains in compliance with the applicable laws and standards of conduct.
     On September 24, 2008, in response to the controversy resulting from this confusing and chaotic nomination period, the Honolulu city council adopted a resolution urging the legislature to require that nomination papers for elective office be obtained at least twenty-four hours prior to the filing deadline. 
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a statutory deadline by which a person seeking candidacy for elective office shall obtain nomination papers in order to ensure that elections proceed in a fair and orderly fashion.
     SECTION 2.  Section 12-2.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§12-2.5  Nomination papers; when available.  (a)  Nomination papers shall be made available from the first working day of February in every even-numbered year; provided that in the case of a special primary or special election, nomination papers shall be made available at least ten days prior to the close of filing.
     (b)  Nomination papers shall not be made available in the twenty-four hour period that precedes the close of filing for any elective office; provided that if the close of filing deadline falls on a Monday, no nomination papers shall be made available after the Friday that immediately precedes the Monday filing deadline."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Elections; Candidate Nomination Papers
 
Description:
Establishes a twenty-four hour cut off of the availability of nomination papers prior to the close of filing for any elective office.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
