HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1177
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO VOTER REGISTRATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 286, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§286-      Verification of voter registration prior to issuance or renewal of license.  (a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), the examiner of drivers shall not issue or renew a driver's license to a Hawaii resident who is not duly registered to vote in accordance with chapter 11.
     (b)  This section shall not apply to any person issued a provisional license in accordance with section 286-102.6; provided that a provisional licensee under the age of eighteen may be issued a license pursuant to section 286-102.6(f) if the provisional licensee who is a Hawaii resident registers to vote in accordance with chapter 11 within thirty days after the provisional licensee's eighteenth birthday."
     SECTION 2.  Section 78-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
     "(c)  All persons seeking employment with the government of the State or in the service of any county shall be citizens, nationals, or permanent resident aliens of the United States, or eligible under federal law for unrestricted employment in the United States, [and] shall become residents of the State, and if eligible, shall be registered to vote in accordance with chapter 11, within thirty days after beginning their employment and as a condition of eligibility for continued employment.
     "Resident" means a person who is physically present in the State at the time the person claims to have established the person's domicile in the State and shows the person's intent is to make Hawaii the person's primary residence."
     SECTION 3.  The chief election officer shall collaborate with the director of human resources development and the mayors and chief clerks of the counties of Hawaii, Kauai, and Maui, and the city and county of Honolulu to establish policies and procedures for voter registration verification that ensure the confidentiality of personal information.
     SECTION 4.  No later than thirty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012, the chief election officer shall submit a report of findings and recommendations to the legislature.
     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on January 1, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Voter Registration
 
Description:
Requires a person to be registered to vote to be issued a driver's license or driver's license renewal, or to be employed by the State or county, beginning on January 1, 2013.  Requires the Chief Election Officer to establish procedures with the Director of Human Resources, and County Mayors and Chief Clerks, and report back to the 2012 Legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
