HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1120
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE BEVERAGE CONTAINER SURCHARGE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that education is one of the foremost priorities of this State.  Our State is eligible to compete for funds ranging from $20,000,000 to $75,000,000 through a $4,350,000,000 federal grant program for schools called the Race to the Top fund.  However, recent school furloughs jeopardized Hawaii's chances of receiving a Race to the Top grant because the furloughs were perceived as directly contradicting Hawaii's stated commitment to reform education, one of the criteria to receive the grants.
     Although the length of Hawaii's school year has been reinstated, the legislature finds that it is necessary to identify additional sources of revenue to substantiate Hawaii's commitment to public education and improve its likelihood of receiving a Race to the Top grant.
     The purpose of this Act is to:
     (1)  Add a beverage container surcharge of 5 cents to the deposit beverage container fee;
     (2)  Establish an education special fund into which the beverage container surcharge shall be deposited; and
     (3)  Authorize the department of education to expend moneys in the education special fund to fund improvements in education and the repair and maintenance of public school facilities.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Education special fund.  (a)  There is established in the state treasury an education special fund to be administered by the department, into which shall be deposited all revenues from the beverage container surcharge as authorized by section 342G-   .  The moneys in the education special fund shall be administered and used by the department to fund improvements in education and the repair and maintenance of public school facilities.  Appropriations or authorizations from the fund shall be expended by the superintendent.  Up to ten per cent of the moneys in the special fund may be used by the department of education to reimburse the department of health for the administrative costs of collecting the beverage container surcharge."
     SECTION 3.  Chapter 342G, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§342G-     Beverage container surcharge.  Beginning on September 1, 2011, there shall be added to the fee assessed in section 342G-102, a beverage container surcharge to be collected and deposited into the education special fund as established under section 302A-   .  The beverage container surcharge shall be 5 cents per deposit beverage container."
     SECTION 4.  The department of education shall report to the governor and the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular sessions of 2013 and 2014, on all expenditures made from the education special fund during the previous year.
     SECTION 5.  The department of health shall report to the legislature on recommendations and implementation of the beverage container surcharge no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval and shall be repealed on June 30, 2015.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Beverage Container Surcharge; Education
 
Description:
Establishes a 5 cent surcharge on deposit beverage containers, to be used by the Department of Education.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
