HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1174
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO COLLECTIVE BARGAINING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 89-9, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended as follows:
     1.  By amending subsection (a) to read:
     "(a)  The employer and the exclusive representative shall meet at reasonable times, including meetings sufficiently in advance of the February 1 impasse date under section 89-11, and shall negotiate in good faith with respect to wages, hours, the benefits and amounts of contributions by the State and respective counties to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund to the extent allowed in subsection (e), and other terms and conditions of employment [which] that are subject to collective bargaining and [which] that are to be embodied in a written agreement as specified in section 89-10, but [such] this obligation does not compel either party to agree to a proposal or make a concession[; provided that the parties may not negotiate with respect to cost items as defined by section 89-2 for the biennium 1999 to 2001, and the cost items of employees in bargaining units under section 89-6 in effect on June 30, 1999, shall remain in effect until July 1, 2001]."
     2.  By amending subsections (d) and (e) to read:
     "(d)  Excluded from the subjects of negotiations are matters of classification, reclassification, [benefits of but not contributions to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund,] and recruitment, examination, initial pricing, and retirement benefits except as provided in section 88-8(h).  The employer and the exclusive representative shall not agree to any proposal [which] that would be inconsistent with the merit principle or the principle of equal pay for equal work pursuant to section 76-1 or [which] that would interfere with the rights and obligations of a public employer to:
     (1)  Direct employees;
     (2)  Determine qualifications, standards for work, and the nature and contents of examinations;
     (3)  Hire, promote, transfer, assign, and retain employees in positions;
     (4)  Suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action against employees for proper cause;
     (5)  Relieve an employee from duties because of lack of work or other legitimate reason;
     (6)  Maintain efficiency and productivity, including maximizing the use of advanced technology, in government operations;
     (7)  Determine methods, means, and personnel by which the employer's operations are to be conducted; and
     (8)  Take [such] actions as may be necessary to carry out the missions of the employer in cases of emergencies.
     This subsection shall not be used to invalidate provisions of collective bargaining agreements in effect on and after June 30, 2007, and shall not preclude negotiations over the procedures and criteria on promotions, transfers, assignments, demotions, layoffs, suspensions, terminations, discharges, or other disciplinary actions as a permissive subject of bargaining during collective bargaining negotiations or negotiations over a memorandum of agreement, memorandum of understanding, or other supplemental agreement.
     Violations of the procedures and criteria so negotiated may be subject to the grievance procedure in the collective bargaining agreement.
     (e)  Negotiations relating to the benefits of and contributions to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund shall be for the purpose of agreeing upon the benefits under the health benefits plan and amounts [which] that the State and counties shall contribute under section 87-4, toward the payment of the costs for a health benefits plan, as defined in section 87-1(8), and group life insurance benefits, and the parties shall not be bound by the benefits and amounts contributed under prior agreements[; provided that section 89-11 for the resolution of disputes by way of arbitration shall not be available to resolve impasses or disputes relating to the amounts the State and counties shall contribute to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund]."
     SECTION 2.  Section 89-11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (g) to read as follows:
     "(g)  The decision of the arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties on all provisions submitted to the arbitration panel.  [If the parties have reached agreement with respect to the amounts of contributions by the State and counties to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund by the tenth working day after the arbitration panel issues its decision, the final and binding agreement of the parties on all provisions shall consist of the panel's decision and the amounts of contributions agreed to by the parties.  If the parties have not reached agreement with respect to the amounts of contributions by the State and counties to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund by the close of business on the tenth working day after the arbitration panel issues its decision, the parties shall have five days to submit their respective recommendations for such contributions to the legislature, if it is in session, and if the legislature is not in session, the parties shall submit their respective recommendations for such contributions to the legislature during the next session of the legislature.  In such event, the final and binding agreement of the parties on all provisions shall consist of the panel's decision and the amounts of contributions established by the legislature by enactment, after the legislature has considered the recommendations for such contributions by the parties.]  It is strictly understood that no member of a bargaining unit subject to this subsection shall be allowed to participate in a strike on the issue of the amounts of contributions by the State and counties to the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund.  The parties shall take whatever action is necessary to carry out and effectuate the final and binding agreement.  The parties [may], at any time and by mutual agreement, may amend or modify the panel's decision.
     Agreements reached pursuant to the decision of an arbitration panel and the amounts of contributions by the State and counties to and the benefits to be provided by the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund, as provided herein, shall not be subject to ratification by the employees concerned.  All items requiring any moneys for implementation shall be subject to appropriations by the appropriate legislative bodies and the employer shall submit all such items within ten days after the date on which the agreement is entered into as provided herein, to the appropriate legislative bodies."
     SECTION 3.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Collective Bargaining; Public Employees; Health Benefits
 
Description:
Includes benefits under the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund as a mandatory subject of negotiation between the public employer and the exclusive representative of a public employee bargaining unit.  Makes disputes relating to the amounts of contributions subject to the arbitration process.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
