HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1224
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE KAHOOLAWE ISLAND RESERVE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The Kahoolawe island reserve commission is funded predominantly by a dwindling trust fund created in 1994 during the federal unexploded ordnance cleanup of Kahoolawe.  Although considerable, this federal appropriation, totaling $44,000,000 over a period of several years, is not substantial enough to establish a sustainable endowment for the long-term restoration of Kahoolawe.
     As stated in the federally-mandated Kahoolawe island conveyance commission final report to Congress in 1993, "in the short term, federal funds will provide the bulk of the program support for specific soil conservation projects and related activities.  In the longer term, however, state revenues will be needed to continue and enhance those activities initiated with federal funds."  For the past sixteen years, federal funding has allowed the Kahoolawe island reserve commission to establish many of its innovative programs that emphasize ancestral and traditional knowledge, provide a cultural approach of respect and connectivity to the environment, and integrate ancient and modern resource management techniques.
     The purpose of this Act is to utilize a portion of state conveyance taxes to replenish the Kahoolawe rehabilitation trust fund to be used for the long-term restoration of Kahoolawe.
     SECTION 2.  Section 6K-9.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is created in the state treasury a trust fund to be designated as the Kaho‘olawe rehabilitation trust fund to be administered by the department with the prior approval of the commission.  Subject to Public Law 103-139, and this chapter:
     (1)  All moneys received from the federal government for the rehabilitation and environmental restoration of the island of Kaho‘olawe or other purposes consistent with this chapter;
     (2)  A portion of the conveyance tax under section 247-7;
    [(2)] (3)  Any moneys appropriated by the legislature to the trust fund;
    [(3)] (4)  Any moneys received from grants, donations, or the proceeds from contributions; and
    [(4)] (5)  The interest or return on investments earned from moneys in the trust fund,
shall be deposited in the trust fund and shall be used to fulfill the purposes of this chapter."
     SECTION 3.  Section 247-7, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§247-7  Disposition of taxes.  All taxes collected under this chapter shall be paid into the state treasury to the credit of the general fund of the State, to be used and expended for the purposes for which the general fund was created and exists by law; provided that of the taxes collected each fiscal year:
     (1)  Ten per cent shall be paid into the land conservation fund established pursuant to section 173A-5;
     (2)  Twenty-five per cent from July 1, 2009, until June 30, 2012, and thirty per cent in each fiscal year thereafter shall be paid into the rental housing trust fund established by section 201H-202; [and]
     (3)  Twenty per cent from July 1, 2009, until June 30, 2012, and twenty-five per cent in each fiscal year thereafter shall be paid into the natural area reserve fund established by section 195-9; provided that the funds paid into the natural area reserve fund shall be annually disbursed by the department of land and natural resources in the following priority:
         (A)  To natural area partnership and forest stewardship programs after joint consultation with the forest stewardship committee and the natural area reserves system commission;
         (B)  Projects undertaken in accordance with watershed management plans pursuant to section 171-58 or watershed management plans negotiated with private landowners, and management of the natural area reserves system pursuant to section 195-3; and
         (C)  The youth conservation corps established under chapter 193[.]; and
     (4)  Ten per cent shall be paid into the Kahoolawe rehabilitation trust fund established under section 6K-9.5."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kahoolawe Island Reserve Commission; Rehabilitation Trust Fund
 
Description:
Authorizes a portion of the conveyance tax revenues to be used to replenish the Kahoolawe rehabilitation trust fund for the long-term restoration of Kahoolawe.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
