HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1276
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO LIVESTOCK.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Fresh pork and beef provide essential nutritional needs to consumers.  Because these food products are perishable, there is a constant risk of food spoilage caused by long transports that, in turn, can cause food-borne illnesses to consumers.  The development of a sustainable meat processing industry is vital for Hawaii's consumers and visitors.
     Hawaii Livestock Cooperative owns the newest slaughter facility in the State, which is the only such facility on Oahu.  The facility currently processes eight hundred hogs per month and supplies various markets throughout the State.  However, the Hawaii Livestock Cooperative's slaughter facility is in danger of filing for bankruptcy and leaving Oahu, the State's largest market, without a slaughter facility.
     With financial support, Hawaii Livestock Cooperative will be able to make investments in modern equipment, expand and improve their stock of animals, and develop new markets and products.  The legislature finds that the continued operations of Hawaii Livestock Cooperative will contribute to the State's food security and therefore is in the interest of public's health, safety, and welfare.
     The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds to Hawaii Livestock Cooperative, which will serve a public purpose by enabling the cooperative's slaughter facility to stabilize their operations.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 as a grant pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to the Hawaii Livestock Cooperative to make investments in modern equipment, expand and improve their stock of animals, develop new markets and products, and take other necessary action to stabilize its slaughter facilities operations.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  The Hawaii Livestock Cooperative shall prepare a report detailing a sustainable business plan that includes:
     (1)  Planned uses of the funds received pursuant to section 2;
     (2)  Pro forma financial statements; and
     (3)  Commitments from various meat industry stakeholders.
The Hawaii Livestock Cooperative shall submit the report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agriculture; Livestock; Grant
 
Description:
Provides a grant pursuant to chapter 42F, HRS, to the Hawaii Livestock Cooperative to enable the cooperative's slaughter facility to stabilize their operations.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
