HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
128
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PROSTITUTION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 712-1207, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§712-1207  Street solicitation of prostitution; designated areas.  (1)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the boundaries of Waikiki and while on any public property, to offer or agree to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee.
     (2)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the boundaries of other areas in this State designated by county ordinance pursuant to subsection (3), and while on any public property, to offer or agree to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee.
     (3)  Upon a recommendation of the chief of police of a county, that county may enact an ordinance that:
    (a)   Designates areas, each no larger than three square miles, as zones of significant prostitution-related activity that is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public; or
    (b)   Alters the boundaries of any existing area under paragraph (a);
provided that not more than four areas may be designated within the State.
     (4)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any person violating this section shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be sentenced to a mandatory term of thirty days imprisonment.  The term of imprisonment shall be imposed immediately, regardless of whether the defendant appeals the conviction, except as provided in subsection (5).
     (5)  As an option to the mandatory term of thirty days imprisonment, if the court finds the option is warranted based upon the defendant's record, the court may place the defendant on probation for a period not to exceed six months, subject to the mandatory condition that the defendant observe geographic restrictions that prohibit the defendant from entering or remaining on public property, in Waikiki and other areas in the State designated by county ordinance during the hours from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m.  Upon any violation of the geographic restrictions by the defendant, the court, after hearing, shall revoke the defendant's probation and immediately impose the mandatory thirty-day term of imprisonment.  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting the imposition of stricter geographic restrictions under section 706-624(2)(h).
     (6)  Any person charged under this section may be admitted to bail, pursuant to section 804-4, subject to the mandatory condition that the person observe geographic restrictions that prohibit the defendant from entering or remaining on public property, in Waikiki and other areas in the State designated by county ordinance during the hours from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any person who violates these bail restrictions shall have the person's bail revoked after hearing and shall be imprisoned forthwith.  Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting the imposition of stricter geographic restrictions under section 804-7.1.
     (7)  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a police officer, without warrant, may arrest any person when the officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a violation of subsection (5) or (6), and the person shall be detained, without bail, until the hearing under the appropriate subsection can be held, which hearing shall be held as soon as reasonably practicable.
     (8)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the arresting officer may also impound the vehicle of a person violating this chapter if:
          (A)  the motor vehicle was used in the commission of the crime; and
          (B)  the person arrested is the registered owner of the vehicle or the vehicle is a rental vehicle.
     A county shall establish ordinances for the impoundment and return of motor vehicles and rental vehicles, and may enact reasonable fees for the processing and storage of impounded vehicles under this chapter.
     [(8)] (9)  For purposes of this section:
     "Area" means any zone within a county that is defined with specific boundaries and designated as a zone of significant prostitution by this section or a county ordinance.
     "Motor vehicle" means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power but not operated upon rails.
     "Public property" includes any street, highway, road, sidewalk, alley, lane, bridge, parking lot, park, or other property owned or under the jurisdiction of any governmental entity or otherwise open to the public.
     "Rental vehicle" means a motor vehicle:
     (1)  Of the private passenger type including passenger vans, minivans, and sport utility vehicles; or
     (2)  Of the cargo type, including cargo vans or pickup trucks with a gross vehicle weight of less than twenty-six thousand pounds,
that do not require a commercial driver's license for the operation of the vehicle."
     "Sexual conduct" has the same meaning as in section 712-1200(2).
     "Waikiki" means that area of Oahu bounded by the Ala Wai canal, the ocean, and Kapahulu avenue.
     [(9)] (10)  This section shall apply to all counties; provided that if a county enacts an ordinance to regulate street solicitation for prostitution, other than an ordinance designating an area as a zone of significant prostitution-related activity, the county ordinance shall supersede this section and no person shall be convicted under this section in that county."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Prostitution
 
Description:
Provides that the county may impound vehicles used in the commission of street prostitution in specified zones as established by the counties.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
