HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1283
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TAXES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 243-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsections (a) and (b) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Every distributor, in addition to any other taxes provided by law, shall pay a license tax to the department of taxation for each gallon of liquid fuel refined, manufactured, produced, or compounded by the distributor and sold or used by the distributor in the State or imported by the distributor, or acquired by the distributor from persons who are not licensed distributors, and sold or used by the distributor in the State.  Any person who sells or uses any liquid fuel, knowing that the distributor from whom it was originally purchased has not paid and is not paying the tax thereon, shall pay such tax as would have applied to such sale or use by the distributor.  The rates of tax imposed are as follows:
     (1)  For each gallon of diesel oil, 2 cents;
     (2)  For each gallon of gasoline or other aviation fuel sold for use in or used for airplanes, 2 cents;
     (3)  For each gallon of naphtha sold for use in a power-generating facility, 2 cents;
     (4)  For each gallon of liquid fuel, other than fuel mentioned in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), and other than an alternative fuel, sold or used in the city and county of Honolulu, or sold in any county for ultimate use in the city and county of Honolulu, 17 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "city and county of Honolulu fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5;
     (5)  For each gallon of liquid fuel, other than fuel mentioned in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), and other than an alternative fuel, sold or used in the county of Hawaii, or sold in any county for ultimate use in the county of Hawaii, 17 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "county of Hawaii fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5;
     (6)  For each gallon of liquid fuel, other than fuel mentioned in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), and other than an alternative fuel, sold or used in the county of Maui, or sold in any county for ultimate use in the county of Maui, 17 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "county of Maui fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5; and
     (7)  For each gallon of liquid fuel, other than fuel mentioned in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), and other than an alternative fuel, sold or used in the county of Kauai, or sold in any county for ultimate use in the county of Kauai, 17 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "county of Kauai fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5.
     If it is shown to the satisfaction of the department, based upon proper records and from any other evidence as the department may require, that liquid fuel, other than fuel mentioned in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), is used for agricultural equipment that does not operate upon the public highways of the State, the user thereof may obtain a refund of all taxes thereon imposed by this section in excess of 1 cent per gallon.  Any diesel oil purchased for use in equipment owned and operated by a county fire department shall not be subject to the diesel oil tax imposed in paragraph (1).  The department shall adopt rules to administer such refunds.
     (b)  Every distributor of diesel oil, in addition to the tax required by subsection (a), shall pay a license tax to the department for each gallon of diesel oil sold or used by the distributor for operating a motor vehicle or motor vehicles upon public highways of the State.  The rates of the additional tax imposed are as follows:
     (1)  For each gallon of diesel oil sold or used in the city and county of Honolulu, or sold in any other county for ultimate use in the city and county of Honolulu, 15 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "city and county of Honolulu fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5;
     (2)  For each gallon of diesel oil sold or used in the county of Hawaii, or sold in any other county for ultimate use in the county of Hawaii, 15 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "county of Hawaii fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5;
     (3)  For each gallon of diesel oil sold or used in the county of Maui, or sold in any other county for ultimate use in the county of Maui, 15 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "county of Maui fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5; and
     (4)  For each gallon of diesel oil sold or used in the county of Kauai, or sold in any other county for ultimate use in the county of Kauai, 15 cents state tax, and in addition thereto an amount, to be known as the "county of Kauai fuel tax", as shall be levied pursuant to section 243-5.
     If any user of diesel oil furnishes a certificate, in a form that the department shall prescribe, to the distributor or if the distributor who uses diesel oil signs the certificate, certifying that the diesel oil is for use in operating a motor vehicle or motor vehicles in areas other than upon the public highways of the State, the tax as provided in paragraphs (1) to (4) shall not be applicable.  If a certificate is not or cannot be furnished and the diesel oil is in fact for use for operating a motor vehicle or motor vehicles in areas other than upon public highways of the State, the user thereof may obtain a refund of all taxes thereon imposed by the foregoing paragraphs.  The tax imposed by paragraphs (1) to (4) shall not be applicable to any diesel oil purchased for use in equipment owned and operated by a county fire department.  The department shall adopt rules to administer the refunding of such taxes."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that the amendments made to section 234-4(a), Hawaii Revised Statutes, by section 1 of this Act, shall not be repealed when section 234-4(a), Hawaii Revised Statutes, is repealed and reenacted on December 31, 2012, pursuant to section 5 of Act 103, Session Laws of Hawaii 2007, as amended by section 3 of Act 198, Session Laws of Hawaii 2009.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
License Taxes; Diesel Oil; County Fire Departments Exempt
 
Description:
Exempts county fire departments from paying state taxes on diesel oil.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
