HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1231
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO DROUGHT MITIGATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that a viable agriculture industry requires a steady, reliable supply of water.  However, drought conditions continue to adversely affect local farms and ranches, hampering their ability to produce quality products on a consistent basis throughout the year.
     The legislature believes that to address the harmful impact of droughts, mitigation measures in the Hawaii drought plan must be implemented.  The goal of the Hawaii drought plan is to develop coordinated emergency response mechanisms and to outline steps toward mitigating the effects of future droughts.  The Hawaii drought plan provides clear policies and directs responsible agencies to implement immediate, short-term and long-term response measures to mitigate the impact of droughts.
     The legislature also finds that in 2004, county drought committees were formed for each of the four counties in Hawaii.  Each of the county drought committees developed a drought mitigation strategy for its respective county, emphasizing drought mitigation projects.  These county drought mitigation strategies represent the local needs and concerns of each county and are incorporated by reference into the Hawaii drought plan.
     The legislature further finds that to implement the Hawaii drought plan adequately, sufficient funding to the counties is necessary to address the many challenges that the State's agriculture industry faces in preparing for droughts.
     The purpose of this Act is to provide funding to pursue drought mitigation projects and measures in each county of the State.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $4,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 for a grant-in-aid to the counties for agricultural drought mitigation measures and projects, to be appropriated as follows:
     County of Hawaii             $
     County of Kauai              $
     County of Maui               $
     City and county of Honolulu  $
     Total                        $4,000,000
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the appropriate county department of the counties of Hawaii, Maui, and Kauai and the city and county of Honolulu, respectively.
     SECTION 3.  Each of the county drought committees shall submit a report to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session, on the status of that county's drought mitigation projects.  Each report shall include:
     (1)  The actions and steps taken to pursue and implement new projects to mitigate the effect of future droughts;
     (2)  The status and progress of existing drought mitigation strategies, including existing drought mitigation projects; and
     (3)  The actions taken to draw upon available federal funds to support drought mitigation projects and, where no action has been taken to draw upon federal funds, an explanation for the inaction.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon approval; provided that section 2 shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Drought Mitigation; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates funds to the counties for drought mitigation purposes.  Requires the counties to report to the legislature on the status of drought mitigation projects.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
