HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1228
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO WATER.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 174C, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§174C-A  Water development study.  (a)  The department of agriculture shall conduct and do what is necessary to prepare a statewide water development study for agricultural uses in the State, in accordance with chapter 167 and this chapter, which shall:
     (1)  Briefly summarize the previous, current, and future plans to prepare the state agricultural water use and development plan;
     (2)  Determine and investigate existing and future water resources that can be developed for agricultural use on commercial farms, including an analysis of:
         (A)  Surface water capacity;
         (B)  Subsurface water capacity; and
         (C)  Other water producing facilities;
     (3)  Identify additional support and ancillary facilities, including storage and distribution for farming areas;
     (4)  To the extent feasible, compute the probable range of water demand for farming areas based on the range of probable agricultural use;
     (5)  Develop alternatives to implementing additional water capacity to meet existing and potential demands;
     (6)  Propose and discuss alternative management concepts for irrigation water systems;
     (7)  Develop a geographical information system, in conjunction with the department of agriculture and its specifications, which will be made available to the department;
     (8)  Use the geographical information system and currently available data sets to determine data sets that can possibly be developed;
     (9)  Develop an implementation plan, including funding alternatives; and
    (10)  Summarize the regulatory framework, including pertinent legal matters and decisions.
     §174C-B  Water development study special fund; established.  (a)  There is established the water development study special fund to be administered by the department of agriculture.  The fund shall consist of:
     (1)  Funds appropriated by the legislature for the purpose of section 174C-A;
     (2)  Any federal funds received for the purpose of section 174C-A; and
     (3)  Any interest on moneys within the fund.
     (b)  The fund shall be used to prepare the water development study established under section 174C-A.
     (c)  In administering the fund, the department of agriculture shall maintain records of all expenditures and disbursements made from the fund.
     (d)  The department of agriculture shall submit to the legislature an annual report on activities under the water development study special fund no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session."
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $         for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, to be deposited into the water development study special fund.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the water development study special fund the sum of $         or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to prepare the statewide water development study pursuant to this Act.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  In codifying the new sections added by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Water Development Study; Appropriation
 
Description:
Allows for the preparation of a water development study and establishes the water development study special fund.  Effective July 1, 2011.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
