HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1249
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HOMELESSNESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  In 2010, a Homeless Service Utilization Report prepared by the center of the family at the University of Hawaii and the homeless programs office of the department of human services revealed that statewide, there are 13,886 people who experience homelessness.  This represents an increase of three per cent from just a year ago.  The report also revealed that six hundred forty-six persons deemed themselves at risk of homelessness or precariously housed because they are three monthly paychecks away from homelessness.
     The legislature finds that Hawaii's limited rental housing stock and the growing population have resulted in high rental housing costs.  Without affordable rentals, homeless persons who are ready to transition from shelters to permanent housing have nowhere to go, which in turn leaves shelters unable to take in the growing numbers of new residents who become homeless.  This results in a growing population of unsheltered homeless and a higher demand for homeless programs and services.
     The ability of the State's homeless services program office to meet the needs of the growing homeless population has been limited by a consistent lack of resources over the years.  The recent economic downturn has made a dire situation critical, due to budget cuts and the deletion of needed reduction in force positions.
     The purpose of this Act is to address the needs of the growing homeless population in Hawaii and to increase the inventory of affordable rental housing which in turn will enable homeless people to help themselves by achieving improved, permanent living situations.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii housing finance and development corporation shall conduct a survey to identify and inventory state-owned and state-managed housing units statewide that are vacant and could be used as affordable rental housing under chapter 201H, Hawaii Revised Statutes, including housing units that could be used as affordable rental housing if renovated or restored.
     SECTION 3.  The Hawaii housing finance and development corporation shall report to the governor and the legislature no later than December 1, 2011, on the results of the survey conducted under section 2 of this Act, including providing an inventory list that identifies each vacant unit by legal owner, street location, and tax map key number.
SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Homeless; Affordable Housing
 
Description:
Requires the Hawaii housing finance and development corporation to identify housing units, owned or managed by the state, that are vacant and could be used as affordable rental housing.  Report to governor and legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
