HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
121
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE HAWAII CIVIL AIR PATROL.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the Hawaii civil air patrol provides necessary disaster relief, search and rescue, homeland security, and medical emergency transport services to local and national organizations.  The Hawaii civil air patrol also provides low-cost humanitarian emergency services and homeland security support to the State through pre-disaster emergency warning and post-disaster recovery operations, as well as support to federal agencies involved with homeland security in the event of a terrorist attack.
     The legislature further finds that the $75,000 appropriated for fiscal year 2007 was exhausted by March 31, 2008.  The legislature also finds that there was no funding for the Hawaii civil air patrol for fiscal years 1997 through 2003.  The level of funding from fiscal year 2004 through 2007 was below historical funding levels from fiscal year 1982 until fiscal year 1997.  Thus, the Hawaii civil air patrol has historically struggled to maintain its readiness capabilities.  In the past, it has relied upon combining pilot proficiency and competency training with the United States Air Force and federal Drug Enforcement Administration programs.  However, this federal funding is declining.
     The legislature further finds that the lack of funding adversely affects other state functions, including the maintenance of an adequate tsunami warning system and disaster relief missions.
     Since the early 1950s, the civil air patrol has provided tsunami warning services to the State.  When a tsunami alert is issued by the National Weather Service, the civil air patrol mobilizes its aircraft and makes repeated passes over beaches and coastal communities, using sirens and loudspeakers to warn residents.  This function provided an essential service during the tsunami that occurred on February 27, 2010, as eighty per cent of the shoreline in Hawaii does not have a fixed based siren.  The civil air patrol launched nine aircraft around the islands to warn persons near the shore who may not have heard tsunami warnings through radio and television broadcast.  Reports later indicated that virtually everyone on the islands was successfully evacuated to high ground.
     The civil air patrol also plays a vital role in disaster relief.  Volunteer civil air patrol members fly disaster relief officials to remote locations and support local, state, and national disaster relief organizations with experienced pilots and personnel.  The civil air patrol also transports time-sensitive medical materials, blood products, and body tissue among medical centers in the State.
     The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds to help defray the operational expenses of the Hawaii civil air patrol.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the operational expenses of the Hawaii civil air patrol.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of defense for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Civil Air Patrol; Funding; Appropriation
 
Description:
Makes appropriations for the operational expenses of the Hawaii civil air patrol.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
