HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1252
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO GOVERNMENT FACILITIES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the department of accounting and general services central services division repairs and alternations program is responsible for providing major, minor, and emergency repair services and minor alteration services for one-hundred sixty-four state office buildings and facilities.  Services include repairs and alterations of buildings, monitoring and regulating the air conditioning in designated buildings, managing contracts for elevators and air conditioning maintenance, and oversight of the work performed by contracted service providers.  In addition, the department's public works division planning, design, and construction program provides a full range of planning, design, and construction management services for all agencies of the executive branch and for others upon request.
     In meeting the mandates of these programs, the department faces increasing costs of energy consumption, health and safety requirements, natural disasters, energy-efficiency projects, and the challenges that budget cuts and furloughs have placed on the department's ability to manage its resources more efficiently and minimize a backlog of requests for services.
     The purpose of this Act is to provide the department with additional sources of funds to support the department's mission to establish and maintain a clean, safe, and pleasant building work environment; maintain safe and aesthetically pleasing grounds at state buildings and facilities; and provide timely, quality, cost-effective, and innovative repair and alteration services for public buildings and facilities statewide.
     SECTION 2.  Section 107-1.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  The comptroller shall make [reasonable] assessments on construction projects managed by the department of accounting and general services to carry out the program of centralized engineering services.  The assessments shall be [based on a logarithmic curve developed by the department for such services.]       per cent of all state fund appropriations for capital improvements designated for the construction cost element; provided that assessment moneys shall apply only to capital improvement appropriations that are designated for the construction or renovation of state buildings.  All assessments collected shall be deposited into the public works project assessment fund."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Government Facilities; Repair and Maintenance
 
Description:
Changes the formula for assessments on construction projects managed by the department of accounting and general services to carry out the program of centralized engineering services, including repair and maintenance on government facilities.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
