HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1397
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SUSTAINABILITY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  During the 2005 special session, the legislature adopted Act 8, Special Session Laws of Hawaii 2005 (Act 8), to create the Hawaii 2050 task force to review the Hawaii state plan and the State's planning process.  The office of the auditor was required to prepare and submit to the legislature the Hawaii 2050 sustainability plan.  In enacting Act 8, the legislature expressed its belief that government is responsible for resolving daily and immediate issues and public needs, while providing guidance to assure a sustainable future and outlook.
     The creation of the Hawaii 2050 sustainability plan comes as the State faces a growing number of pressing issues, including the steady deterioration of public infrastructure, the lack of affordable housing, a continued reliance on a service-based economy, the vulnerability of Hawaii in a volatile global energy market, possible interruptions in travel and to critical food supplies, threats to fragile island ecosystems, ever-increasing numbers of residents, and an increasing number of visitors over the long-term.  All of these issues raise questions about the long-term limits of growth in the State and motivate the need to begin planning and action to assure Hawaii's future.
     Clearly, a policy framework to establish sustainability as a state priority and ensure a coordinated and coherent approach to fulfilling the long-range vision for a sustainable Hawaii is needed.  The mission of the Hawaii 2050 task force and the objectives of the Hawaii 2050 sustainability plan focus on the revitalization of the State's long-term planning process to better guide the future development of Hawaii.  Addressing and solving issues critical to Hawaii's way of life and natural resources requires coordinated community efforts to produce comprehensive, long-range planning policies and actions.
     In 2008, the legislature adopted Act 225, Session Laws of Hawaii 2008 (Act 225), asking the University of Hawaii at Manoa college of social sciences public policy center to review the Hawaii 2050 sustainability plan and provide a definitive framework for policy makers including defined data, data sources, and benchmarks for each of the major goals.
     The purpose of this Act is to implement the recommendations of the Hawaii 2050 update report, commissioned by Act 225, to establish sustainability as a State priority by adopting the Hawaii 2050 sustainability definitions, guiding principles, and goals.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 226, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART   .  2050 SUSTAINABILITY POLICY
     §226-      Findings and purpose.  In 2005, the legislature enacted Act 8, Special Session Laws of Hawaii 2005, to create the Hawaii 2050 task force to review the Hawaii state plan and develop sustainability policies to address the vital needs of the State through the year 2050.  The office of the auditor was required to prepare and submit to the legislature the Hawaii 2050 sustainability plan.
     The task force developed a comprehensive sustainability plan that included guiding principles and five major goals for Hawaii 2050.
     The purpose of this part is to set forth the Hawaii 2050 sustainability policy, which shall serve as a guide for the future long-range sustainability planning of the State.
     §226-      Definitions.  As used in this part, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings unless the context indicates another meaning or intent:
     "Ahupuaa" means a traditional native Hawaiian resource and behavioral management system that ensures respect for the air, land, water, and other scarce natural resources that make life sustainable from the mountains to the sea.
     "Kanaka maoli" means native Hawaiians.
     "Sustainability" means achieving the following:
     (1)  Respect of the culture, character, beauty, and history of the State's island communities;
     (2)  Striking a balance between economic, social, community, and environmental priorities; and
     (3)  Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
     §226-      Sustainability; guiding principles.  (a)  Hawaii residents desire a balance between economic, cultural, and environmental concerns and priorities.  Thus, sustainability in Hawaii shall be established as the overall theme and guiding principle of sustainability policy:
     (1)  To balance economic, social, community, and environmental priorities;
     (2)  To respect and live within the natural resources and limits of the State;
     (3)  To achieve a diversified and dynamic economy;
     (4)  To honor the host culture;
     (5)  To make decisions based on meeting the needs of the present without compromising the needs of future generations;
     (6)  To observe the principles of the ahupuaa system to guide resource management decisions; and
     (7)  To emphasize that everyone, including individuals, families, communities, businesses, and government, has the responsibility for achieving a sustainable Hawaii.
     §226-      Sustainability goals.  There are established five major goals that are designed to achieve a preferred future by the year 2050, which shall include the following:
     (1)  A way of life in which living sustainably is a part of daily practice in Hawaii;
     (2)  A diversified and globally competitive economy that will enable residents to live, work, and play meaningfully in Hawaii;
     (3)  Responsible and respectful use, replenishment, and preservation of the State's natural resources for future generations;
     (4)  A community that is strong, healthy, vibrant, and nurturing, thus providing safety nets for those in need; and
     (5)  An environment where Kanaka maoli and island cultures and values thrive and are perpetuated."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Sustainability; State Planning
 
Description:
Incorporates the definitions, guiding principles, and goals of the Hawaii 2050 Sustainability Task Force Report into the Hawaii State Planning Act, codified as chapter 226.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
