HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
13
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CHAPTER 471, HAWAII REVISED STATUTES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 471, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§471-A   Mandatory continuing education.   (a)  Each veterinarian, that is licensed pursuant to this chapter, shall comply with the provisions of the mandatory continuing education requirements, except as set forth in subsection (c).  Veterinarians who do not satisfy the mandatory continuing education requirements shall not be issued a license renewal and shall not practice veterinary medicine until they have met such requirements.
     (b)  During each biennial licensure period, an applicant for licensure renewal shall complete a minimum of forty-five hours of acceptable formal continuing education, a maximum of twenty-two and one-half hours of which may be self-instructional coursework acceptable to the department.
 
     (c)  The following shall be exempt from the mandatory continuing education requirements of this section:
(1)  veterinarians who are renewing their licenses for the first time since their initial license issuance;
(2)  any person exempt from the licensure requirement imposed by section 471-2;
(3)  a licensed veterinarian who is not actively engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, provided that such a veterinarian shall comply with all mandatory continuing education requirements prior to being issued a new license or activating an expired or surrendered license."
     SECTION 2.  Section 471-9, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§471-9  Licenses.  (a)  Except as provided in this section, the board of veterinary examiners shall issue a license upon payment of a license fee to engage in the practice of veterinary medicine to all persons meeting the requirements of this chapter.
     (b)  All licenses issued by the board shall expire on June 30 of each even-numbered year next following the date of issuance.
     (c)  Every veterinarian shall pay a biennial renewal fee in each even-numbered year.  The payment of the renewal fee shall entitle the veterinarian to renewal of the license, subject to the mandatory continuing education requirements of this chapter.
     (d)  Any holder of an expired license may be reinstated as a veterinarian upon payment of the renewal fee and a penalty fee, and compliance with the mandatory continuing education requirements of this chapter.
     (e)  Notwithstanding any other provision, no license shall expire while the holder thereof is serving on active duty in the armed forces of the United States during any emergency declared by the President or Congress and six months after the termination thereof."
     SECTION 3.  Section 471-10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§471-10  Refusal to grant and revocation or suspension of license.  (a)  In addition to any other actions authorized by law, the board may refuse to grant, renew, reinstate or restore a license for any cause which would be ground for revocation of a license under the law.
     (b)  In addition to any other actions authorized by law, the board may revoke or suspend the license of any veterinarian or fine the licensee, or both, for any cause authorized by law, including but not limited to the following:
     (1)  Professional misconduct, gross negligence, or manifest incapacity;
     (2)  Violation of this chapter or the rules adopted pursuant thereto or any other law which applies to the licensee as a practicing veterinarian;
     (3)  Making any false representations or promises through advertising or otherwise;
     (4)  Habitual intemperance in the use of alcoholic beverages or addiction to the use of narcotic or dangerous substances;
     (5)  Mental incompetence;
     (6)  Any fraudulent, dishonest, or deceitful act in connection with the practice of veterinary medicine;
     (7)  Making a false statement in any document submitted or required to be filed by this chapter;
     (8)  Revocation, suspension, or other disciplinary action by another state of a license or certificate for reasons as provided in this section;
     (9)  Conviction of or plea of nolo contendere to a penal offense substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a veterinarian, notwithstanding any statutory provision to the contrary;
    (10)  Violation of chapter 329, the uniform controlled substances act, or any rule adopted pursuant thereto;
    (11)  Failure to report any disciplinary action taken against a licensee in another jurisdiction within thirty days after the disciplinary action becomes final; [or]
    (12)  Conduct or practice contrary to the recognized principles of medical ethics of the veterinary profession as adopted by the Hawaii Veterinary Medical Association and the American Veterinary Medical Association; or
    (13)  Noncompliance with the mandatory continuing education requirements of this chapter."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Veterinary medicine
 
Description:
Proposes mandatory continuing education requirements for veterinarians.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
