HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1357
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE STATEWIDE TRAFFIC CODE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 291C, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§291C-    Heavy vehicles; prohibition; left lane.  (a)  Whenever any roadway or street has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand pounds shall be prohibited from driving in the left lane.
     (b)  The prohibition in this section shall not apply to mass transit vehicles using zipper lanes and high occupancy vehicle lanes, as defined in section 291C-221; to an emergency vehicle as defined in section 291-11.6; and to any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand pounds that is using the left lane to execute a left turn or to pass a vehicle.
     (c)  As used in this section, "mass transit vehicle" means a bus, including a school bus (but excluding a charter or sightseeing service bus) with a gross vehicle weight rating that is over ten thousand pounds, whether publicly or privately owned, which provides service to the general public or provides special service on a regular or continuing basis."
     SECTION 2.  Section 291C-53, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§291C-53  Restrictions on use of controlled-access roadway or highway.  (a)  The director of transportation by rules adopted in accordance with chapter 91, and the counties by ordinance, may regulate or prohibit the use of any controlled-access roadway or highway within their respective jurisdictions by any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic.  Persons operating motorcycles which are otherwise permitted on a controlled-access roadway or highway shall be permitted to use any high occupancy vehicle lane designated on such roadway or highway.  For the purposes of this subsection, "high occupancy vehicle lane" means a designated lane of a laned roadway where the use of such designated lane is restricted to vehicles carrying at least the minimum number of persons designated by the director of transportation as indicated on official signs and other official traffic-control devices, and to other vehicles as provided by rules adopted in accordance with chapter 91, or by county ordinance.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no person shall operate a neighborhood electric vehicle on any controlled-access roadway or highway.
     (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand pounds shall be prohibited from driving in the left lane of a controlled-access roadway or highway.  The prohibition in this subsection shall not apply to mass transit vehicles, as defined in section 291C-(c), using zipper lanes or high occupancy vehicle lanes, as defined in subsection (a).
     [(b)] (c)  The director of transportation or a county adopting any such prohibition shall erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on the controlled-access roadway or highway on which such prohibitions are applicable and when in place no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such devices."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________

Report Title:
Traffic; Heavy Vehicles
 
Description:
Prohibits any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than ten thousand pounds from traveling in the left lane of a multi-lane roadway or street except when turning or passing.  Exempts mass transit vehicles using zipper lanes and high occupancy vehicle lanes and emergency vehicles.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
