HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
134
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 378-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§378-2  Discriminatory practices made unlawful; offenses defined.  (a)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice:
     (1)  Because of race, sex, sexual orientation, age, religion, color, ancestry, disability, marital status, domestic abuse victim status, or arrest and court record:
         (A)  For any employer to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment;
         (B)  For any employment agency to fail or refuse to refer for employment, or to classify or otherwise to discriminate against, any individual;
         (C)  For any employer or employment agency to print, circulate, or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement, or publication or to use any form of application for employment or to make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment, which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification, or discrimination;
         (D)  For any labor organization to exclude or expel from its membership any individual or to discriminate in any way against any of its members, employer, or employees; or
         (E)  For any employer or labor organization to refuse to enter into an apprenticeship agreement as defined in section 372-2; provided that no apprentice shall be younger than sixteen years of age;
     (2)  For any employer, labor organization, or employment agency to discharge, expel, or otherwise discriminate against any individual because the individual has opposed any practice forbidden by this part or has filed a complaint, testified, or assisted in any proceeding respecting the discriminatory practices prohibited under this part;
     (3)  For any person whether an employer, employee, or not, to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any of the discriminatory practices forbidden by this part, or to attempt to do so;
     (4)  For any employer to violate the provisions of section 121-43 relating to nonforfeiture for absence by members of the national guard;
     (5)  For any employer to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment, any individual because of assignment of income for the purpose of satisfying the individual's child support obligations as provided for under section 571-52;
     (6)  For any employer, labor organization, or employment agency to exclude or otherwise deny equal jobs or benefits to a qualified individual because of the known disability of an individual with whom the qualified individual is known to have a relationship or association;
     (7)  For any employer or labor organization to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment, or withhold pay, demote, or penalize a lactating employee because an employee breastfeeds or expresses milk at the workplace.  For purposes of this paragraph, the term "breastfeeds" means the feeding of a child directly from the breast; or
     (8)  For any employer to refuse to hire or employ or to bar or discharge from employment, or otherwise to discriminate against any individual in compensation or in the terms, conditions, or privileges of employment of any individual because of the individual's credit history or credit report, unless the information in the individual's credit history or credit report directly relates to a bona fide occupational qualification under section 378-3(2).
     (b)  Subsection (a)(1) shall apply to domestic abuse victims; provided that the victim provides notice to the victim's employer of such status.
     (c)  As used in this section:
     "Domestic abuse victim" means an individual who is the victim of "domestic abuse" as that term is defined in section 378-71."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Employment Practices; Domestic Violence
 
Description:
Prohibits employers from discriminating against an employee or applicant for employment based upon the employee's or the applicant's domestic abuse victim status; provided that the domestic abuse victim notifies the employer of such status.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
