HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1338
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATED TO THE ECONOMY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

PART I
     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that economic growth to benefit all Hawaii residents will require enhancing the State's human resources; and with respect to job creation in high-paying industry sectors, it means that Hawaii must closely track key growth areas within the State's economy and align its residents' skill sets with the needs of businesses in these emerging industries.
     For example, the department of business, and economic development, and tourism's "2010 Update Report on Hawaii's Targeted & Emerging Industries" identified the following areas as "high‑performing" in comparison with national and local growth trends:  scientific research and development (averaging 5.2 per cent job growth between 2002-2010, or nearly 3.3 per cent higher than growth of the same industry group nationally), medical testing, aquaculture, performing and creative arts, specialty health care, business consulting, design services, technology manufacturing, and computer services.  These high‑performing jobs in emerging sectors accounted for roughly 69,600 jobs (nine per cent of all civilian jobs in 2010), but the sectors generated twenty per cent of the total gain in jobs for Hawaii's civilian economy, or about 15,000 new jobs between 2002-2010.  For about half of the high-performing sectors, the average annual earnings exceeded $50,000 in 2010.  While other emerging industry sectors may not have demonstrated the same degree of high-performance growth as the above areas, most of the emerging industries target clusters are growing at rates that are higher than other industry sectors within the State.
     Since 2007, the legislature, department of business, and economic development, and tourism, University of Hawaii, and various educational stakeholders have undertaken a pilot demonstration project to evaluate the impact of experiential learning initiatives in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields and creative media, pursuant to appropriations in Acts 111 and 271, Session Laws of Hawaii 2007, and federal American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 funding during 2009-2010.  In 2010, House Concurrent Resolution No. 297, S.D. 1, C.D. 1, further requested a report on the economic value of expanded workforce development capacity and STEM initiatives prior to the start of the 2011 legislative session.
     Hence, the purpose of this part is to:
     (1)  Provide a permanent funding source for STEM experiential learning initiatives that have yielded strong student performance outcomes and expanded the reach of the program through teacher-driven efforts;
     (2)  Provide recommendations to maximize the benefits of STEM and creative media experiential learning initiatives (e.g., expanded participation throughout Hawaii's public and private schools, opportunities to leverage public-private resources in broadening the reach of innovative experiential learning programs throughout the State);
     (3)  Improve the quality of teaching in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics at Hawaii's public schools by providing professional development opportunities for practicing teachers, as well as attracting highly qualified individuals who hold degrees in these subject areas to the teaching profession; and
     (4)  Better align the State's workforce needs for economic growth in new industry clusters through annual reporting requirements for the State's emerging industries in conjunction with the allocation of necessary resources into experiential learning initiatives within the University of Hawaii, department of education, and other business development and education partners.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the Hawaii excellence through science and technology academy pilot program within Kauai community college.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the Kauai community college for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 in collaboration with Kauai community college for the Hawaii excellence through science and technology academy pilot program.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the fostering inspiration and relevance through science and technology pre-academy program pursuant to section 304A-1861; the robotics and problem-based, applied learning program pursuant to section 304A-1862; and the research experiences for teachers program pursuant to section 304A-1863.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the University of Hawaii for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the business/education internship and mentorship program.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of business, economic development, and tourism for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 6.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the development of professional development programs in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines for practicing teachers.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the University of Hawaii for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 7.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the transition to teaching program to provide stipends to attract science, technology, engineering, and mathematics graduates to the University of Hawaii post baccalaureate certificate in secondary education program.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the University of Hawaii for the purposes of this part.
PART II
     SECTION 8.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to be deposited into the Hawaii 3Ts school technology laboratories fund established pursuant to section 302A-1314, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 9.  There is appropriated out of the Hawaii 3Ts school technology laboratories fund the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to maintain the project EAST program in existing schools and to expand the program to schools statewide; provided that no funds shall be expended unless matching funds are provided pursuant to section 302A-1314(p), Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the Economic Development Alliance of Hawaii, Inc., in accordance with section 302A-1314, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and implemented in partnership with county economic development boards, as appropriate, for the purposes of this part.
PART III
     SECTION 10.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Workforce Development; STEM Initiatives; Appropriations
 
Description:
Appropriates funds for the:  Hawaii excellence through science and technology academy pilot program; fostering inspiration and relevance through science and technology pre-academy program; robotics and problem-based, applied learning program; research experiences for teachers program; professional development program for public school science and mathematics teachers; business/education internship and mentorship program; incentives for people who hold degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics subjects to obtain teaching certificates through the University of Hawaii's post baccalaureate certificate in secondary education program; project EAST continuation and expansion.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
