HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1363
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AEROSPACE DEVELOPMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Pursuant to House Concurrent Resolution No. 123, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010, the legislature finds that the aerospace industry presents a timely opportunity for strategic investment in a growth industry that can realize Hawaii's potential as a major contributor to and beneficiary of global space enterprise.  Our State's unique mid-Pacific location, Moon- and Mars-like terrain, diverse natural resources, first class technological infrastructure, resident scientific and engineering expertise, and long-standing ties with space-faring nations throughout Asia and the Pacific can be leveraged to develop, grow, and sustain a wide variety of aerospace activities.
     For nearly half a century, Hawaii has played a pivotal role in the development of our nation's space program, beginning with astronaut training for the Apollo lunar missions and the development of world-class observatories in the 1960's.  Since then, Hawaii has hosted a broad range of nationally-funded programs in planetary geosciences, satellite communications, space-based remote sensing and environmental monitoring, deep-space surveillance, and other aerospace-related activities sponsored by the University of Hawaii, the United States military, and numerous private interests.
     Hawaii remains an important player in our nation's space efforts through diverse programs throughout the State including world-class astronomy facilities at the Mauna Kea Science Reserve, deep space surveillance at the Air Force Maui Optical & Supercomputing Site, pioneering space research at the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics & Planetology on Oahu, and multi-environment testing and evaluation of advanced aerospace technologies at the Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai.  Enabled by these national and multinational efforts, local aerospace companies have grown up in Hawaii and have developed technical talent and state-of-the-art infrastructure to support a wide range of military and civilian aerospace applications.  Additionally, major national aerospace companies already established in the State, are poised to expand their operations in Hawaii as a means of creating a bridge to larger Asian and Pacific markets.  Hawaii's unique geographic characteristics and human and infrastructure assets place the State in a singular position to take advantage of a growing recognition of the importance of multinational collaboration in the aerospace industry, especially for human and robotic missions to space.  In April 2010, Hawaii entered into the Space Act Agreement with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to provide for expanded and diversified aerospace activities statewide with particular emphasis on initiatives that will leverage Hawaii's natural resources and existing relationships to seed multinational collaboration on programs that will bring  significant scientific, educational, and commercial benefits to the State and the nation.
     The legislature finds that the aerospace industry is demonstrably a dynamic growth industry in which strategic investment will produce returns to alleviate the State's economic malaise.  Effective aerospace development will attract substantial federal and private investment; support sustainable, high-paying employment opportunities for local residents; provide opportunities for innovative education and inspiration of students in critical science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields; and enable larger and more diverse aerospace initiatives in both the public and private sectors.  The legislature finds that, once developed in Hawaii, the aerospace industry will remain rooted in the State because of its dependence on Hawaii's natural and human resources.  Therefore, aerospace development is a sustainable project that will reward relatively modest up-front investment with increasing long-term scientific, educational, and economic returns.
     In recognition of the importance of aerospace development to Hawaii's future, the legislature created the office of aerospace development within the department of business, economic development, and tourism through Act 355, Session Laws of Hawaii 1988, to "identify and promote opportunities for expanding and diversifying aerospace-related industries."  Through its constituent and partner agencies, including the Pacific International Center for Space Exploration Systems, Pacific International Space Alliance, and others, the office of aerospace development conducts outreach, management, and scientific activities to fulfill its mission of enhancing Hawaii's ability to both contribute to and benefit from the global space enterprise.
     The purpose of this Act is to promote the continuing development of the aerospace industry in Hawaii by providing the office of aerospace development with sufficient funding and staff support to effectively carry out its statutory duties and to authorize further operations of the starlight reserve advisory working committee to enable the conservation of Hawaii's natural night-sky resource.
     SECTION 2.  Act 161, Session Laws of Hawaii 2009, section 6, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  The advisory committee created in this part shall be terminated on June 30, [2011.] 2012."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $745,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the office of aerospace development to carry out its duties to identify and promote opportunities for expanding and diversifying aerospace-related industries in the State as follows:
     (1)  Support for the aerospace advisory committee and starlight reserve advisory working committee      $5,000
     (2)  Support for the Pacific international space alliance                                $70,000
     (3)  Support for program development and outreach to the federal and foreign governments and the aerospace industry                      $15,000
     (4)  Support for public education and community outreach                                $15,000
     (5)  Support for the Pacific international space center for exploration systems                $400,000
     (6)  Salary for a full-time administrative assistant for the office of aerospace development $40,000
     (7)  Support for installation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's habitat demonstration unit                                  $75,000
     (8)  Matching funds to be provided to the university of Hawaii to qualify for a grant from the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research of the National Science Foundation     $125,000
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of business, economic development, and tourism for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Aerospace Industry Development; Appropriation
 
Description:
Extends the sunset date of the starlight reserve advisory working committee by one year; makes appropriations to the department of business, economic development, and tourism.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
