HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1395
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO STATE ENTERPRISE ZONES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Following the 2009 legislative session, the chairs of the senate committee on economic development and technology and the house committee on economic revitalization, business, and military affairs convened a technology caucus work group to bring together industry stakeholders and interested policymakers to develop recommendations for legislation to enhance Hawaii's struggling economy.  The work group provided a forum to review the current status of Hawaii's science/technology industry, identify state or county actions that impede long-term growth and expansion of technology companies, and develop recommendations to address these impediments.  The work group also identified best practices supporting the growth and development of science/technology industries in other jurisdictions to aid in developing proposed suggestions for future legislation.
     The legislature finds that adding businesses engaged in the development or production of various types of renewable energy to those that may qualify for state enterprise zone tax incentives and regulatory flexibility would stimulate business, agricultural, and industrial growth in areas that would result in neighborhood revitalization.  The legislature further finds that adding other forms of renewable resources including sun, falling water, biogas, geothermal, ocean water, currents, and waves, biomass, biofuels, and hydrogen production from renewable energy sources into the State enterprise zone program is consistent with the current approved business activities, which presently include wind energy production.  These additional incentives will provide the impetus to help attract renewable energy businesses to Hawaii and further the State's renewable energy goals.
     The purpose of this Act is to implement recommendations of the technology caucus work group by expanding eligible business activity in the State enterprise zones to include the development or production of various types of renewable energy.
     SECTION 2.  Section 209E-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending the definition of "eligible business activity" to read as follows:
     "§209E-2  Definitions.  As used in this chapter:
     "Eligible business activity" means the:
     (1)  Manufacture of tangible personal property, the wholesale sale of tangible personal property as described in section 237-4, or a service business as defined in this section;
     (2)  Production of agricultural products where the business is a producer as defined in section 237-5, or the processing of agricultural products, all or some of which were grown within an enterprise zone;
     (3)  Research, development, sale, or production of all types of genetically-engineered medical, agricultural, or maritime biotechnology products; or
     (4)  [Production of electric power from wind energy for sale primarily to a public utility company for resale to the public.] Development or production of fuels, thermal energy, or electrical energy from renewable resources, including:
         (A)  Wind;
         (B)  The sun;
         (C)  Falling water;
         (D)  Biogas, including landfill and sewage-based digester gas;
         (E)  Geothermal;
         (F)  Ocean water, currents, and waves, including ocean thermal energy conversion;
         (G)  Biomass, including biomass crops, agriculture and animal residues and wastes, and solid waste;
         (H)  Biofuels; and
         (I)  Hydrogen produced from renewable energy sources."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Enterprise Zones; Renewable Energy
 
Description:
Expands eligible business activity in the State enterprise zones to include the development or production of various types of renewable energy.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
