HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1323
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE WESTERN INTERSTATE COMMISSION FOR HIGHER EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 304A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding three new sections to part VII, subpart D, to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§304A‑A  Definitions.  As used in this subpart, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
     "Commission" means the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education.
     "Hawaii commission" means the Hawaii Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education established under section 304A‑3204.
     "Hawaii commissioners" means the members of the Hawaii Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education.
§304A‑B  Professional student exchange program.  The Hawaii commission may establish a repayment policy for students who receive any financial support from funds appropriated by the legislature for the Hawaii professional student exchange program of the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education.
     §304A‑C  Professional student exchange program special fund.  (a)  There is established a professional student exchange program special fund to be administered and expended by the Hawaii commission.
     (b)  The following moneys shall be deposited into the special fund:
     (1)  Principal and interest payments received as repayment of financial support from former or current participants of the professional student exchange program, pursuant to section 304A‑B; and
     (2)  Interest earned or accrued on moneys in the special fund.
     (c)  Moneys in the special fund shall be expended to:
     (1)  Support the professional student exchange program's activities, including the provision of financial support to participants at Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education receiver institutions; and
     (2)  Enforce the collection of delinquent obligations."
     SECTION 2.  Section 304A-3204, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§304A-3204[]  State commissioners.]  Hawaii Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education.  (a)  There is established within the University of Hawaii for administrative purposes the Hawaii Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education as the commission for the State of Hawaii of the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, established under Article III of the Western Regional Education Compact.
     (b)  The governor, with the advice and consent of the senate, shall appoint the members of the Hawaii commission [for this State of the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education that is created under the provisions of Article III of the Western Regional Education Compact].  The positions of the Hawaii commissioners shall be placed within the University of Hawaii for administrative purposes.
     [(b)] (c)  The qualifications and terms of office of the [members of the commission for this State] Hawaii commissioners shall conform with Article IV of the compact.
     [(c)] (d)  The Hawaii commissioners shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses by the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education.
     [(d)] (e)  The Hawaii commissioners [for this State], with the help of an advisory committee selected by them, shall certify those students from the State of Hawaii who may receive special assistance in their professional education from the State, under contracts provided for in the Western Regional Education Compact."
     SECTION 3.  Section 304A-3205, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§304A-3205[]]  Expenditures; reports.  Expenditures by the Hawaii commission, including the amounts fixed annually as the equal contribution of each member to the compact, shall be made upon warrants issued by the state comptroller based upon vouchers approved by any one of the Hawaii commissioners.  A report of the activities and expenses of the Hawaii commissioners and a proposed program for the State's continuing participation in the activities of the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education, including a budget request, shall be submitted by the Hawaii commissioners to the legislature for each regular legislative session."
     SECTION 4.  In codifying the new sections added by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute the appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
WICHE; Professional Student Exchange Program; Special Fund
 
Description:
Establishes the Hawaii Western Interstate Commission of Higher Education (Hawaii WICHE).  Allows Hawaii WICHE to establish a repayment policy for students who receive financial support from certain funds appropriated for the Hawaii commission.  Establishes a professional student exchange program special fund.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
