HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
149
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PUBLIC SAFETY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Act 8, First Special Session Laws of Hawaii 2007 (Act 8), enacted the Community Safety Act, which was codified as chapter 353H, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The Community Safety Act established a comprehensive offender reentry system under the purview of the department of public safety.  Act 8 also required the department of public safety to submit to the legislature annual reports through 2010 relating to the implementation, progress, and effectiveness of the program components specified in Act 8.
     While the department's annual report lists program activities and statistics, it does not include information on program outcomes.  The legislature finds that performance indicators are an effective way to track the progress of the comprehensive reentry system and to reflect the philosophical change to the department's approach to rehabilitation and reentry mandated by Act 8.
     The purpose of this Act is to direct the department of public safety to establish key performance indicators or measures to be incorporated in reports that evaluate the outcomes of program components as required in Act 8.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 353H, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§353H-    Performance indicators; reporting.  (a)  The department of public safety shall develop performance indicators that accurately reflect progress toward specific goals, including but not limited to:
     (1)  Improving recidivism rates;
     (2)  Decreasing prisoner assaults on correctional staff;
     (3)  Reducing correctional staff turnover; and
     (4)  Improving departmental efficiencies in staffing, budgeting, and data management and analysis.
     (b)  The department of public safety shall submit a report to the legislature within thirty days of the last working day of the months of April, August, and December, beginning with the period ending on August 31, 2011.  Each report shall reference key performance indicators for that period that track rehabilitation and reentry efforts for individuals being prepared to exit the correctional system.
     (c)  The key performance indicators shall include:
     (1)  The number of individuals who have obtained a general education diploma or an equivalent competency-based diploma;
     (2)  The number of individuals for whom a reentry plan is filed and the number of individuals who exit jail or prison with a reentry plan;
     (3)  Drug test failure rates of inmates while incarcerated and while on parole;
     (4)  The number of individuals who have completed a drug treatment program provided by the department of public safety;
     (5)  The number of individuals who have completed restorative circles;
     (6)  The number of individuals who have applied for a reduction of their minimum sentence, the number of applications approved and denied, and when applicable, the reasons for the denial of an individual's application; and
     (7)  The number of parole revocation hearings and the results of parole revocation hearings that, when applicable, explain why an individual's revocation was denied.
     The department of public safety shall post the reports electronically on the department's internet website in a timely manner."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Inmate Rehabilitation; Reentry System; Performance Indicators
 
Description:
Requires the department of public safety to establish performance indicators for inmate reentry system.  Requires reports, using key performance indicators, to be provided to the legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
