HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1471
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PUBLIC ASSISTANCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 346-29, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  No applicant or recipient who is found guilty of fraudulently misrepresenting residence to obtain assistance in two or more states shall be entitled to public assistance under this chapter for ten years from date of conviction.  No applicant or recipient shall be entitled to public assistance under this chapter who is a resident of the State for less than one year, or who is a fugitive felon or who is in violation of a condition of probation or parole or has sufficient income or other resources to provide a standard above that provided in this chapter, or who is an inmate of any public institution, except that any inmate of a public institution who is otherwise eligible for medical assistance and who has been determined by the medical director of the institution as having a major illness or medical condition requiring the provision of medical care outside of the institution may receive assistance under this chapter.  An inmate of a public institution or resident of a medical institution may apply for assistance to begin after the inmate's discharge from the institution.  To enforce this subsection, the department shall examine each list of inmates within, or newly admitted to, a correctional facility in the State that is submitted to the department by the director of public safety pursuant to section 353-12.5, regardless of the nature of the offense for which an inmate is incarcerated or the duration of incarceration, to determine whether an inmate is eligible for public assistance under this chapter.
     For the purposes of this section, "resident" means a person who is physically present in the State at the time the person claims to have established the person's domicile in the State and shows the person's intent is to make Hawaii the person's primary residence."
     SECTION 2.  Section 356D-42, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§356D-42[]]  Housing; tenant selection.  Subject to the following limitations and preferences, the authority shall select tenants upon the basis of those in greatest need for the particular housing[.]; provided that the authority shall not select as a tenant any applicant who has not been a resident for at least one year.  The authority may limit the tenants of any state low-income housing project to classes of persons when required by federal law or regulation as a term or condition of obtaining assistance from the federal government.  Within the priorities established by the authority recognizing need, veterans with a permanent disability of ten per cent or more as certified by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, the dependent parents of the veteran, and the deceased veteran's widow shall be given first preference.
     For the purposes of this section, "resident" means a person who is physically present in the State at the time the person claims to have established the person's domicile in the State and shows the person's intent is to make Hawaii the person's primary residence."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Assistance; Residency Requirement
 
Description:
Requires an applicant or recipient of public assistance to be a resident of the State for at least one year.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
