HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1438
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 222, Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  The department may make such expenditures and shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as are necessary for the efficient execution of the functions vested in the department by this Act.  All expenditures of the department and all moneys necessary for loans made by the department, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be allowed and paid upon the presentation of itemized vouchers approved by the chairman of the commission or the chairman's designated representative.  The department shall make an annual report to the legislature of the State upon the first day of each regular session and such special reports as the legislature may from time to time require.  The annual report shall include information concerning:
     (1)  The total number of homestead lots awarded;
     (2)  The total number of homestead lots awarded where a home was actually built on the lot;
     (3)  The total number of homestead lots awarded where infrastructure improvements were made, resulting in a ready-to-build lot; and
     (4)  The amount of capital improvement project funds that were issued to support infrastructure developments on the homestead lots that were awarded, specified by type (for example, general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, etc).
The [chairman] chairperson and members of the commission shall give bond as required by law.  The sureties upon the bond and the conditions thereof shall be approved regularly by the governor."
     SECTION 2.  The department of Hawaiian home lands shall report to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session, on the homestead lots awarded each year, as reported in the department's annual reports between the years of 2002 and 2009.  The report shall include information concerning:
     (1)  The total number of homestead lots awarded;
     (2)  The total number of homestead lots awarded where a home was actually built on the lot;
     (3)  The total number of homestead lots awarded where infrastructure improvements were made, resulting in a ready-to-build lot; and
     (4)  The amount of capital improvement project funds that were issued to support infrastructure developments on the homestead lots that were awarded, specified by type (for example, general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, etc).
     SECTION 3.  The director of finance is authorized to issue general obligation bonds in the sum of $300,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary is appropriated for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the purpose of building the water infrastructure system designed by the Honokaia ohana to support ranching activity on the Honokaia homestead tract in Waimea, Hawaii.
SECTION 4.  The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of Hawaiian home lands for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that sections 3 and section 4 shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Department of Hawaiian Home Lands; Homestead Awards Reporting
 
Description:
Requires DHHL to report on the total number of homestead lots awarded that resulted in actual homes being built and infrastructure being developed.  Authorizes $300,000 in general obligation bonds to build the water infrastructure system for the Honokaia homestead tract in Waimea.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
