HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1457
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HIGHER EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds education to be of vital importance to the progress and well-being of the State.  Ensuring access to higher education with State moneys is and shall remain a priority.  However, the legislature finds that with the diminishing revenue and financial difficulties faced by the State, careful review of all government spending is necessary.  The cost to the State of each full time undergraduate student in the university system exceeds $15,000 per year.  Many of these students have surpassed the number of credits needed to graduate and extend their matriculation well beyond the normal four-year time period.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 304A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§304A-      Annual reports of excessive undergraduate credits; assessments.  The University of Hawaii shall submit a report to the director of finance no later than August 30, 2011, and each August 30 thereafter, which shall report for each semester of the previous school year:
     (1)  The number of undergraduate students attending the University of Hawaii system that have already completed the number of credits necessary to obtain their respective bachelor's degree, but have not yet graduated;
     (2)  The number of undergraduate students attending the University of Hawaii system who have not declared a major and have completed more than      credits; and 
     (3)  The additional cost to the University of Hawaii directly attributable to each student reported pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (3).
The director of finance, upon receiving the report from the University of Hawaii, shall assess the University of Hawaii for the additional cost to the State, including research and other costs, that are directly attributable to undergraduate students who exceeded the number of credits necessary to graduate, and students who have not declared a major and have completed more than      credits. 
     Within thirty days of receiving notice from the director of finance regarding the assessment amount for the previous school year, the University of Hawaii shall transfer the amount assessed to the general fund of the State.  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the assessment may be paid from special funds of the University of Hawaii system or any other funds appropriated to the University of Hawaii system."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________

Report Title:
Assessment; Director of Finance; Tuition; University of Hawaii
 
Description:
Requires the University of Hawaii to report annually to the Director of Finance the number of students in the previous academic year who attended and were in excess of the necessary credits for graduation or prior to declaring a major.  Authorizes the Director of Finance to assess and transfer the costs.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
