HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1483
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE MOLOKAI IRRIGATION SYSTEM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that construction on the Molokai irrigation system was started in 1957 to provide water to the central farming areas of Molokai as part of a federal and state commitment to native Hawaiian homesteaders, consistent with the objectives of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, to enable native Hawaiians to return to their lands and promote self-sufficiency.  The provision of adequate amounts of water at a reasonable rate for agricultural operations on Hawaiian home lands remains central to this policy.
     The legislature further finds that the high cost of water delivery is causing a hardship on Hawaiian homestead farmers, making it difficult for some lessees to pay their water bill.  In the past, the state department of agriculture offered a discounted rate to Molokai irrigation system water users.  However, this discounted rate was eliminated in 2009 due to a significant drop in water consumption and consequent reduction in revenues. 
     The purpose of this Act is to carry out the objectives of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, by:
(1)  Providing water to Molokai irrigation system water users who lease tracts of Hawaiian home lands under section 207 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, at a reduced rate;
(3)  Forgiving loans to Molokai homesteaders that were previously incurred; and
(2)  Appropriating funds to cover the operational costs of the Molokai irrigation system.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of agriculture shall provide water to Molokai irrigation system users who lease tracts of Hawaiian home lands under section 207 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, at a reduced rate of at least     per cent but not more than     per cent of the standard rate from July 1, 2011, to June 30, 2013.
     (b)  The department of agriculture shall forgive all amounts owed by any Molokai homestead farmer for the provision of irrigation water that are past due as of the effective date of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $      or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the sum of $         or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to cover the operational costs of the Molokai irrigation system.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Molokai Irrigation System; Homestead Lessees
 
Description:
Directs the Department of Agriculture to provide water to Molokai Irrigation System users who lease tracts of land under section 207 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, at a reduced rate.  Requires the Department of Agriculture to forgive past due bills for the provision of irrigation water for Molokai homestead farmers.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
