HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1442
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FISHING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the commercial fishing village at Honolulu's pier 38 provides independent fishermen with a marketing service to help sell their daily catch at a fair price.  This system makes the freshest fish available to the wholesale, retail, and restaurant sectors and provides fishermen with same-day payments for their catch.  United Fishing Agency, also known as the Honolulu Fish Auction, has enjoyed the support of fishermen and marketers throughout its history and, today, processes approximately twenty-five million pounds of fish worth approximately $70,000,000 annually.
     The purpose of this Act is to direct the University of Hawaii at Hilo to study and determine the feasibility of developing a public entity on the island of Hawaii that is modeled after the commercial fishing village at Honolulu's pier 38.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The pacific aquaculture and coastal resources center at the University of Hawaii at Hilo shall conduct a study on the feasibility of developing a public entity on the island of Hawaii that is modeled after the commercial fishing village at the city and county of Honolulu's pier 38.  In addition, the study shall identify other options that may enhance the fishing industry, improve seafood quality and safety, promote sustainability, and generate positive economic activity.  In conducting the study, the pacific aquaculture and coastal resources center at the University of Hawaii at Hilo shall consult with appropriate local and state agencies, scientists and experts, and environmental organizations.
     (b)  At minimum, the study shall include the following:
     (1)  Seller, buyer, and product demographic information, including:
         (A)  The type, size, and number of commercial and sport fisherman, or other fish sellers;
         (B)  The location, type, and quantity of fish that are caught and landed, including daily and seasonal consistency of the catch;
         (C)  The type, number, and location of buyers, along with their forms, quantities, and desired products, differentiating between normally or seasonally available fish; and
         (D)  Current and future fish, aquaculture, and seafood production, whether produced on land or in the ocean, and demand data by location, type, and quantity;
     (2)  Market information, including:
         (A)  The existing methods for the selling and purchase of product, from the source to the consumer, including any effects on pricing, inefficiencies, and suggested improvements;
         (B)  The feasibility of developing an entity similar to the commercial fishing village at the city and county of Honolulu's pier 38, including the economics based on supply and consistency versus demand, with respect to the number and type of participating buyers and sellers;
         (C)  The implications, tradeoffs, and feasibility of establishing an auction process;
         (D)  The extent of existing fish processing and freezing, to include type, method, location, and options to better meet customer demand; and
         (E)  The existing quality and safety controls and procedures, including the identification of problem areas and recommended options for improvement;
     (3)  Location information, including:
         (A)  Existing areas of fishing activity and options for infrastructure improvements therein;
         (B)  The location of and adequacy of pier space and surrounding land, including options for future expansion;
         (C)  The related business opportunities and economic activity that may be generated as a result of developing a commercial fishing village;
         (D)  The cost of the infrastructure improvements and potential revenues based on the options evaluated;
         (E)  The environmental impact and issues; and
         (F)  The impact of federal and state rules and regulations, to include tsunami codes; and
     (4)  Other relevant information, including:
         (A)  The stakeholders to be involved or affected and any necessary agreements that may need to be executed;
         (B)  Community and stakeholder input, concerns, and feedback; and
         (C)  All other special considerations or pertinent issues.
     SECTION 3.  The pacific aquaculture and coastal resources center at the University of Hawaii at Hilo shall submit a report of its study, including findings, recommendations, and any proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Fishing; Pacific Aquaculture and Coastal Resources Center; Study
 
Description:
Directs the pacific aquaculture and coastal resources center at the University of Hawaii at Hilo to study the feasibility of developing an entity on the big island similar to the commercial fishing village at Honolulu's pier 38.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
