HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1496
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRIBUSINESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the local farmers have difficulty distributing their products to large retail establishments.  The University of Hawaii operates an agricultural extension service program that assists local farmers in the best farming practices.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the University of Hawaii to convene a task force to conduct a study on whether an agribusiness cooperative program should be established.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The University of Hawaii shall conduct a study on whether an agribusiness cooperative program should be established to:
     (1)  Assist local farmers in increasing the distribution of products to large retail establishments; and
     (2)  Develop feed mills located in this State to lower farm expenses and minimize the carbon impact of transporting feed imports to local farmers.
The study shall include a proposal on the means by which the agribusiness cooperative program may be permanently funded through private and public funds and a recommendation on the appropriate state agency or department under which the program should be established.
     (b)  To conduct the study, the University of Hawaii shall convene an agribusiness cooperative program task force composed of:
     (1)  The chairperson of the board of agriculture, or chairperson's designee;
     (2)  Three representatives of the Hawaii Farmers Union, as designated by the president of the Hawaii Farmers Union;
     (3)  A professor of agricultural economics at the University of Hawaii at Hilo, to be designated by the chancellor of the University of Hawaii at Hilo;
     (4)  A representative of the extension agent program of the University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources, to be designated by the dean of the University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources;
     (5)  The chief executive officer of the Hawaii Food Industry Association;
     (6)  The president of the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation, or the president's designee;
     (7)  The president of the Hawaii Cattlemen's Council, Inc., or the president's designee; and
     (8)  A professor of animal livestock at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, to be designated by the dean of the University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources.
     (c)  As used in this section:
     "Large retail establishment" means warehouse clubs and stores, big box retail facilities, and other large supermarkets that sell produce, poultry, or meats.  In general, large retail establishments range in size from twenty thousand square feet to two hundred thousand square feet.
     "Local farmer" means a farmer whose farm is located in Hawaii.
     SECTION 3.  The University of Hawaii shall report findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.      SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agribusiness Cooperative Program; UH; Task Force
 
Description:
Requires the University of Hawaii to convene a task force to conduct a study whether an agribusiness cooperative program should be established in Hawaii.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
