HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1427
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING APPROPRIATIONS FOR PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT COST ITEMS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

PART I
     SECTION 1.  There are appropriated or authorized from the sources of funding indicated below to the department of budget and finance, departmental administration and budget division (BUF 101), the following sums or so much thereof as may be necessary to fund for fiscal biennium 2011-2013, the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund costs and other cost adjustments contained in the agreement negotiated with the exclusive bargaining representative of collective bargaining unit (7):
                             FY 2011-2012       FY 2012-2013
     General funds
     Special funds
     Federal funds
     Other funds
     SECTION 2.  Funds appropriated or authorized by this part shall be allotted by the director of finance to the appropriate state departments for expenditure in the respective fiscal year for the purposes of this part.
PART II
     SECTION 3.  There are appropriated or authorized from the sources of funding indicated below to the department of budget and finance, departmental administration and budget division (BUF 101), the following sums or so much thereof as may be necessary to fund for fiscal biennium 2011–2013, the Hawaii employer-union health benefits trust fund costs and other cost adjustments authorized by chapter 89C, Hawaii Revised Statutes, for state officers and employees excluded from collective bargaining who belong to the same compensation plans as those officers and employees within collective bargaining unit (7):
                             FY 2011-2012       FY 2012-2013
     General funds
     Special funds
     Federal funds
     Other funds
     SECTION 4.  Funds appropriated or authorized by this part shall be allotted by the director of finance to the appropriate state departments for expenditure in the respective fiscal year for the purposes of this part.
PART III
     SECTION 5.  Collective bargaining cost items and cost adjustments provided in this Act for any officer or employee whose compensation is paid, in whole or in part, from federal, special, or other funds shall be paid wholly or proportionately, as the case may be, from the respective funds.
     SECTION 6.  Funds appropriated or authorized by this Act that are not expended or encumbered by the end of the fiscal year for which the appropriation or authorization is made, shall lapse as of those dates.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Collective Bargaining; Unit (7)
 
Description:
Makes appropriation for the collective bargaining cost items of bargaining unit (7) and for cost adjustments for their excluded counterparts.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
