HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1480
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HUMAN SERVICES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346-     Higher education scholarship program.  (a)  There shall be established within the department of human services a higher education scholarship program for eligible former foster youth.  An eligible former foster youth shall be eligible for higher education scholarships after reaching the age of majority, and the higher education scholarships shall be awarded to that former foster youth; provided that:
     (1)  The former foster youth is twenty-six years old or younger; and
     (2)  The former foster youth is attending or has been accepted to attend an accredited institution of higher education.
     (b)  The higher education scholarship may be awarded while the former foster youth is attending an accredited institution of higher education on a full-time basis or on a part-time basis, in accordance with rules adopted by the department.
     (c)  Higher education scholarships may be used by the former youth to pay for costs incurred in undertaking full-time studies or part-time studies at an institution of higher education in accordance with rules adopted by the department.
     (d)  The department's standards relating to income resources of foster children shall be applicable to this section.
     (e)  Higher education scholarships shall be provided subject to the availability of state and federal funds."
     SECTION 2.  The Act establishes a higher education scholarship program for eligible former foster youth in lieu of the existing higher education board allowance program established under section 346-17.4, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The department of human services shall cease accepting new applications for higher education board allowances upon the effective date of this Act.  The department shall submit a report to the legislature no later than twenty days before the regular session of 2012 that shall include:
     (1)  The number former foster youth participating in the higher education board allowances program;
     (2)  Any other issues relating to the anticipated termination of the higher education board allowances program and the implementation in lieu thereof of the higher education scholarship program provided for in this Act; and
     (3)  The date by which the higher education board allowance program can be terminated without prejudice to its existing participants.
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Human Services; Higher Education Scholarship Program
 
Description:
Provides higher education scholarships to eligible former foster youth in lieu of higher education board allowances.  Establishes a higher education scholarship program within the Department of Human Services.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
