HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1475
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FARM TO SCHOOL MONTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawai‘i is facing many uphill battles, from the health of our keiki to the tough economic times.  Over the years Hawai‘i has become dependent on mainland food sources, which have led to food insecurity.  The tough economic times have led to farmers earning less.
     The legislature also finds that since its inception in 1996, Farm to School programs nationwide have been making healthy eating a priority in our schools and building strong community connections.  The Farm to School program provides agriculture, health, and nutrition education opportunities while supporting Hawai‘i's farmers, and brings together schools and local farms with the objective of serving healthy meals in school cafeterias and improving student nutrition.  The Farm to School approach helps children understand where their food comes from and how their food choices impact their bodies, the environment and their communities at large.
     The legislature also finds that the Hawai‘i Department of Health enacted the Healthy Hawai‘i Initiative in 2000, in order to promote healthier lifestyles through community-based targeted intervention.  Throughout the state, the Hawai‘i School Garden Hui is dedicated to addressing educational needs in agricultural sustainability by supporting existing school gardens, implementing new school gardens and integrating locally grown and made foods into cafeterias, snack programs and after school programs with community involvement. 
     The legislature also finds that the Hawai‘i Department of Health supports other related programs like The Kokua Foundation’s Actively Integrate Nutrition and Agriculture In Schools program (AINA IS).  The AINA IS program is working to address childhood health issues like obesity and being overweight by fostering healthy eating habits and encouraging environmental stewardship by connecting children to the land that sustains them in addition to creating an institutional market for Hawai‘i's farmers and their produce.  The AINA IS program integrates Nutrition Education, Garden-based Learning, Agricultural Literacy, Healthy School Lunch, Family & Community Outreach and Waste Reduction and Management, which reduces, reuses and recycles waste in gardens, cafeterias and classrooms. 
     The legislature also finds that these innovative programs are helping Hawai‘i through improving the health of Hawai‘i's keiki, establishing food security, growing the economy through agriculture, and establishing Hawai‘i's food security needs.
     The legislature further finds that that United States House of Representatives recently approved House Resolution 1655, which designates October as National Farm to School month. The resolution seeks to encourage direct farm to school programs nationally, which should in turn bolster local agricultural economies and improve school nutrition, and would be an outcome that would be welcome in Hawai`i.
     The purpose of this act is to designate October as Farm to School Month in Hawai‘i.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 8, Hawai‘i Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§8-      Farm to School Month.   The month of October shall be known and designated "Farm to School Month in Hawai‘i".  This month is not and shall not be construed as a state holiday."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Farm to School Month
 
Description:
Designates October as "Farm to School Month" in Hawai`i.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
