HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1583
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE SUPER BOWL.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The National Football League owns and produces the most popular annual sporting event in the United States, the Super Bowl.  The Super Bowl, in addition to being the game that determines the national champion of professional football, also represents one of the world's greatest entertainment events, transcending the sport to include personalities and activities in other areas of American culture, such as popular music.  Although Hawaii has never hosted the Super Bowl, it has served as the venue for the highly-successful annual match-up known as the Pro Bowl, the all-star game played after the conclusion of each season.
     The legislature finds that as a world-renowned visitor destination, Hawaii has accumulated decades of experience in the tourism and hospitality industries.  The State possesses the necessary infrastructure and resources, including a modern, state-of-the-art convention center, and the hotel capacity to handle the activities, personnel, equipment, and all of the other preparations that the Super Bowl would entail.  Hawaii also possesses the ancillary personnel and infrastructure, such as police, fire department, emergency medical services, parking and traffic control, and appropriate motor vehicles for transportation of personnel and equipment, needed to ensure that all of the activities and programs planned during Super Bowl week leading up to and including the Super Bowl itself, are conducted and staged in a smooth, efficient manner.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a task force to plan and coordinate efforts to bring the Super Bowl to Hawaii.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established within the department of business, economic development, and tourism the Hawaii Super Bowl task force to consist of the following members:
     (1)  Three members of the board of directors of the Hawaii tourism authority to be appointed by the governor;
     (2)  Three individuals representing the hotel and tourism industry in Hawaii appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (3)  Three individuals representing the hotel and tourism industry in Hawaii appointed by the president of the senate;
     (4)  Two members of the house of representatives appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives; and
     (5)  Two members of the senate appointed by the president of the senate.
     The task force shall select a chairperson from among its members to preside over its meetings.  The task force shall hold no fewer than three meetings; provided that meetings may be held during ordinary business hours.  Members shall not be reimbursed for any expenses incurred to attend meetings.
     (b)  The task force shall evaluate the feasibility of and develop a plan for marketing Hawaii as a venue for the National Football League's Super Bowl game and related activities.
     (c)  The task force shall submit a final report on its findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (d)  The Hawaii Super Bowl task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2012.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Super Bowl Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes the Hawaii Super Bowl task force to plan and coordinate efforts to bring the Super Bowl to Hawaii.

 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
