HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1565
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO STATE REHABILITATION COUNCIL.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 348-8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is established within the department a state rehabilitation council.  The council shall consist of [twenty-one] fifteen members appointed by the governor as provided in section 26-34 and without regard to section 78-4.  The members shall include:
     (1)  At least one representative of a parent training and information center;
     (2)  At least one representative of the client assistance program;
     (3)  At least one qualified vocational rehabilitation counselor with knowledge of and experience with vocational rehabilitation programs, who shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member if employed by the vocational rehabilitation division of the department;
     (4)  At least one representative of community rehabilitation program service providers;
     (5)  Four representatives of business, industry, and labor;
     (6)  Representatives of disability advocacy groups representing a cross section of individuals with physical, cognitive, sensory, and mental disabilities, and parents, family members, guardians, advocates, or authorized representatives of individuals with disabilities who have difficulty in representing themselves or are unable due to their disabilities to represent themselves;
     (7)  Current or former applicants for or recipients of vocational rehabilitation services;
     (8)  At least one representative of the state educational agency responsible for the public education of students with disabilities;
     (9)  At least one representative of the state workforce development council; and
    (10)  The administrator of the vocational rehabilitation division of the department, who shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member;
provided that the council shall include at least one member from each county; and provided further that a majority of the council members shall be persons who have disabilities and are not employed by the vocational rehabilitation division of the department.  The council members shall elect a chairperson from the membership.  Each member of the council shall serve a three-year term but may not serve more than two consecutive full terms.  Any vacancy occurring in the council membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, except that the governor may delegate the authority to fill such a vacancy to the remaining members of the council after making the original appointment."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

Report Title:
Membership; State Rehabilitation Council.
 
Description:
Reduces the number of members of the State Rehabilitation Council from twenty-one to fifteen.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
