HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1567
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO INSPECTIONS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that there are only two pathways for introduced species to arrive in the state:  air and sea transportation.  Air transportation has been proven to be the highest risk pathway, transporting introduced species which are much more likely to become established, as well as various illegal plants and animals, invasive pests, a higher quantity of non-native pests, and a greater variety of invasive pests.  Each year, eighty per cent of the insects intercepted by inspectors are at the airports.
     The need for modern inspection facilities is a necessity to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.  Delays in cargo inspection can cause the rot and decay of perishable goods and frustrate airlines and their users.
     Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Order No. 5190.6B allows the expenditure of airport funds for ground access projects in two general cases: 
(1)  If the project qualifies as an integral part of an airport capital project; and
(2)  If the project is owned or operated by the sponsor and is directly and substantially related to the air transportation of passengers or property. 
In the second case, the FAA conducts a three-part analysis to determine whether:
     (1)  The facility is owned or operated by the airport sponsor;
     (2)  The facility is directly and substantially related to air transportation; and
     (3)  The airport contribution is prorated to the forecast use of the facility.
     The purpose of this Act is to satisfy the FAA's criteria and mitigate the environmental concerns posed by the airport modernization program by requiring the department of transportation to provide biosecurity inspection facilities at certain major airports to inspect air cargo.
SECTION 2.  Chapter 261, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"§261-A     Biosecurity inspection facilities.  (a)  The department shall provide biosecurity inspection facilities at Honolulu International Airport, Kona International Airport at Keahole, and Hilo International Airport, in compliance with section 150A-53 for the inspection, consolidation, deconsolidation, and treatment of air cargo, and to facilitate the inspection of air cargo, and to meet the needs of each island's agricultural industries. 
(b)  The department shall design, construct, and operate inspection facilities, treatment facilities, inspector facilities, and inspection bays.  The department shall coordinate with other departments in the planning, design, and operation of these facilities to ensure the effectiveness of the facilities."
SECTION 3.  There is appropriated of out of the airport revenue fund the sum of $          or so much thereof as may be necessary for the fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same amount or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for biosecurity inspection facilities as provided in section 2 of this Act.
The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of transportation for the purposes of this Act.
SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that section 3 of this Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

 
Report Title:
Airports; Biosecurity; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Transportation to provide biosecurity inspection facilities at Honolulu International Airport, Kona International Airport at Keahole, and Hilo International Airport.  Appropriates funds.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
