HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1587
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HIGHWAYS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the establishment of a highway patrol is essential to increase the effectiveness of enforcing the statewide traffic code and related county ordinances, particularly with regard to speeding and driving under the influence of an intoxicant.  To this end, allowing the sheriff division of the department of public safety to serve as a state highway patrol to handle traffic violations on state roadways would be ideal.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a highway patrol within the sheriff division of the department of public safety to enforce all traffic laws and other applicable laws of the State and counties.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 353C, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§353C-A  Highway patrol.  (a)  There shall be established within the sheriff division of the department, a state highway patrol, which shall consist of state law enforcement officers appointed by the sheriff.
     (b)  The state highway patrol established under this section shall enforce all of the traffic laws of the State under title 17 and county ordinances.  The director, in consultation with the sheriff and the police chief of each county, shall provide, by rule, for a listing of the statutes and ordinances within the jurisdiction of the state highway patrol.
     (c)  The director, in consultation with the sheriff, shall enter into an agreement with the police chief of each county to coordinate responsibilities for traffic enforcement between the state highway patrol and a county police force.
     (d)  The state highway patrol shall be funded by the highway patrol special fund established under section 353C-B.
     §353C-B  Highway patrol special fund; established.  (a)  There is established the highway patrol special fund to be administered by the department.  The fund shall consist of:
     (1)  Funds appropriated by the legislature for the purpose of section 353C-A;
     (2)  Any federal funds received for state highway patrol or enforcement purposes; and
     (3)  Any interest on moneys within the fund.
     (b)  The fund shall be used to fund and operate the state highway patrol established under section 353C-A.
     (c)  In administering the fund, the department shall maintain records of all expenditures and disbursements made from the highway patrol special fund.
     (d)  The director, in consultation with the sheriff, shall prepare and submit to the legislature an annual report on the activities of the highway patrol special fund no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $         for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, to be deposited into the highway patrol special fund.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the highway patrol special fund the sum of $         or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the establishment of a state highway patrol.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of public safety for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  In codifying the new sections added by section 2 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________

 
Report Title:
Traffic Safety; Traffic Enforcement; Highway Patrol
 
Description:
Establishes a State highway patrol and State highway patrol special fund.  Effective July 1, 2011.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
