HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1584
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
ESTABLISHING A COMMISSION TO EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES TO FOSTER INTERNATIONAL RELATIONSHIPS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  There is established, within the department of business, economic development, and tourism for administrative purposes only, a permanent commission to be known as the                  commission, which shall explore opportunities to develop and foster international relationships, both official and personal, and showcase Hawaii's unique culture when Hawaii serves as the venue for major events, beginning with the upcoming Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit taking place in Honolulu in November 2011.
     SECTION 2.  The commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed as follows:
     (1)  One member shall be appointed by the governor;
     (2)  Two members shall be appointed by the senate president;
     (3)  Two members shall be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (4)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor of the county of Hawaii;
     (5)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and county of Honolulu;
     (6)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor of the county of Kauai; and
     (7)  One member shall be appointed by the mayor of the county of Maui.
The governor shall designate the chair of the commission from among the appointed members.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, an individual appointed to another board or commission shall be eligible to be appointed as a member of this commission.
     The members shall not receive compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their duties under this Act.
     Any member of the commission shall be immune from civil liability as provided for under section 26-35.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 3.  The commission shall:
     (1)  Develop, plan, and coordinate opportunities for the State, the counties, the business community, and other interested groups or individuals to develop and foster international relationships, particularly when large international events are held in the State, beginning with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit taking place in Honolulu in November 2011; and
     (2)  Explore opportunities to showcase Hawaii's arts, historic properties, and other items and places of cultural significance to the international community.
     In fulfilling its responsibilities, the commission shall consult, cooperate with, and seek advice from any and all appropriate agencies, including the Hawaii tourism authority and the department of business, economic development, and tourism.
     SECTION 4.  The commission shall submit a report of its activities, findings, and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular legislative session.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Permanent Commission; Fostering International Relationships
 
Description:
Creates a permanent commission to explore opportunities for fostering international relationships, particularly when large international events are held in the State.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
