HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1512
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE WEED AND SEED STRATEGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that weed and seed is a strategy sponsored by the United States Department of Justice and is administered locally by the United States Attorney's Office for the district of Hawaii.  Initiated in 1992, weed and seed is an innovative, comprehensive multi-agency approach to law enforcement, crime prevention, and community revitalization.  The strategy is currently implemented in at least one hundred and fifteen sites across the nation.
     The weed and seed strategy is a collaborative effort among law enforcement agencies at the federal, state, and county levels, social service agencies, private businesses, nonprofit organizations, and residents to reclaim, restore, and rebuild communities.  The four key elements of the weed and seed strategy are:
     (1)  Law enforcement;
     (2)  Community policing;
     (3)  Prevention, intervention, and treatment programs; and
     (4)  Neighborhood restoration.
     The weed and seed strategy works with local law enforcement to prevent, control, and reduce violent crime, drug abuse, and gang activity in targeted neighborhoods by "weeding" out the criminal elements in the community.  Community policing involves having police officers work closely with community residents to develop solutions to violent and drug-related crimes.  "Seeding" the community involves collaboration among various human services organizations to implement prevention, intervention treatment, and neighborhood revitalization projects, programs, and activities.
     The legislature finds that the State has benefited greatly from weed and seed programs at sites on Oahu that encompass Ala Moana, Chinatown, downtown Honolulu, Kalihi, Waipahu, and Ewa Beach.  Since the implementation of the strategy, crime in those areas has been reduced significantly.  The legislature further finds that the strategy's success warrants maintaining the operations of the weed and seed program in these communities, and expanding it to other communities in the future.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a permanent weed and seed strategy within the department of labor and industrial relations, and make an appropriation for the weed and seed strategy.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 371K, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§371K‑    Weed and seed.  (a)  There is established within the office of community services the weed and seed strategy to reduce crime and improve the quality of life for residents and neighborhoods in the State.  The weed and seed strategy shall be a collaborative effort among community residents, law enforcement agencies, social service providers, educators, area businesses, and other resource agencies and support organizations to:
     (1)  Create, initiate, implement, and support responsible community-based activities, projects, and services that help reduce crime and drug use in neighborhoods;
     (2)  Engage members of the community to encourage the development and maintenance of economic and social well-being; and
     (3)  Teach and model collaborative efforts that focus on sustainable results.
     (b)  The office of community services shall:
     (1)  Administer appropriations and other funding for the weed and seed strategy; and
     (2)  Identify or assist in identifying those areas to implement for the weed and seed strategy.
     (c)  The weed and seed strategy shall be guided by an advisory committee, exempt from section 26-34, composed of representatives selected by the executive director of the office of community services from various public and private sectors, including:
     (1)  Federal agencies, including the United States Attorney's Office, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration, and the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
     (2)  State agencies, including the department of education, department of health, department of human services, department of labor and industrial relations, department of public safety, Hawaii public housing authority, the office of the governor, and the office of the lieutenant governor;
     (3)  County agencies, including the mayor, the prosecuting attorney, the chief of police, and other appropriate departments and agencies; and
     (4)  Community organizations engaged in providing health and human services.
     (d)  The weed and seed advisory committee shall, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session of the legislature, submit a report to the legislature and the governor on its activities, including projects completed or ongoing, funds expended, and other relevant data or information on the program."
     SECTION 3.  Section 371K-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is established within the department of labor and industrial relations, for administrative purposes only, an office of community services.  The following shall be among the programs to be under the auspices of and coordinated through the office:
     (1)  Progressive neighborhoods program;
     (2)  Hawaii office of economic opportunity;
     (3)  Refugee resettlement program; [and]
     (4)  State immigrant services center[.]; and
     (5)  Weed and seed strategy."
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to maintain the weed and seed strategy in areas currently designated for weed and seed strategy and to expand the weed and seed strategy into other areas of the State; provided that any appropriation shall be conditioned on obtaining federal funding for the weed and seed strategy in a designated area.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of labor and industrial relations for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Weed and Seed Strategy; DLIR; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the weed and seed strategy under the department of labor and industrial relations.  Makes appropriation.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
