HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1529
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PLANNING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  (a)  There is established within the governor's office for administrative purposes a temporary task force to review and update the Hawaii state planning act and the planning, programming, and budgeting system of the State.  The governor shall convene the task force within thirty days after the effective date of this Act.
     (b)  The task force shall be composed of:
     (1)  The chairperson of the senate ways and means committee or the chairperson's designee;
     (2)  The chairperson of the house finance committee or the chairperson's designee;
     (3)  The chairperson of the senate water, land, and housing committee or the chairperson's designee;
     (4)  The chairperson of the house water, land, and ocean resources committee or the chairperson's designee;
     (5)  The chairperson of the senate economic development and technology committee or the chairperson's designee;
     (6)  The chairperson of the house economic revitalization and business committee or the chairperson's designee;
     (7)  A member appointed by the president of the senate;
     (8)  A member appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (9)  The director of budget and finance or the director's designee;
    (10)  The comptroller or the comptroller's designee;
    (11)  The director of the office of planning or the director's designee;
    (12)  The chairperson of the board of directors of the chamber of commerce of Hawaii or the chairperson's designee;
    (13)  The executive director of the economic research organization at the University of Hawaii (UHERO) or the executive director's designee;
    (14)  The chairperson of the board of directors of the Hawaii tourism authority or the chairperson's designee; and
    (15)  The president of the tax foundation of Hawaii or the president's designee.
     (c)  The members of the task force shall:
     (1)  Select the chairperson of the task force from among the members themselves; and
     (2)  Serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their official duties under this Act.
     (d)  The chairperson of the task force may select additional task force members at the chairperson's discretion.
     (e)  The office of planning shall provide all administrative, technical, professional, and clerical support required by the task force for matters pertaining to the review and update of the state planning act.
     The department of budget and finance shall provide all administrative, technical, professional, and clerical support required by the task force for matters pertaining to the review and update of the planning, programming, and budgeting system.
     (f)  The task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session, beginning with the 2012 regular session.
     (g)  The task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2015.
     SECTION 2.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii State Planning Act; Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System; Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes a task force to review and update the Hawaii state planning act and the planning, programming, and budgeting system.  Requires annual reports to the legislature.  Task force ceases to exist on 6/30/15.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
