HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1569
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRICULTURE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature recognized the importance of reducing the impact of invasive species on Hawaii’s agriculture and environment by adopting the biosecurity program, established by Act 236, 2008 Session Laws of Hawaii.  Based on the commodities destroyed by the department of agriculture, the legislature found that certain commodities have a higher potential for the transport of invasive species into the State.  These commodities were labeled “high risk.”  One of the actions mandated by the biosecurity program is import replacement, which means reducing the importation of “high risk” commodities by increasing the production of replacement commodities in the State, as stated in section 150A-53(6), Hawaii Revised Statutes.
The effect of reducing the amount of imported “high risk” commodities would be to lower the risk of potential invasive species entering the State.  This would also allow port inspection resources to focus on other lower risk commodities, thus enhancing the overall effectiveness of inspections at the port.
     Currently, some of these “high risk” commodities or similar commodities are already grown in the State.  One important aspect of this effort will be collaboration, not only with the Hawaii department of agriculture and various research institutions, but with farmers and industry.  As flowers and produce importation is driven by consumer demand, factors that will need to be considered to maintain a successful program for these locally grown commodities include price, quality, consistency, and availability.
     SECTION 2.  The department of agriculture shall develop and implement an import replacement pilot program wherein the department shall research, coordinate, and promote the production of certain commodities deemed high risk in the State to reduce the importation of such commodities.  The department shall identify the types of commodities that are suitable for replacement and shall assess how to promote the production of such commodities.
The chairperson of the board of agriculture shall submit a report on the status of the development and implementation of the import replacement pilot program, including any necessary proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012. 
SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the import replacement pilot program.
The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act. 
SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July, 1, 2011, and shall be repealed on June 30, 2014.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Department of Agriculture; Import Replacement Pilot Program
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Agriculture to develop and implement an Import Replacement Pilot Program.  Effective July, 1, 2011.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
