HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1513
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE WEED AND SEED STRATEGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that "weed and seed" is a strategy sponsored by the United States Department of Justice and is administered locally by the United States Attorney's Office.  Initiated in 1992, weed and seed is an innovative, comprehensive multi-agency approach to law enforcement, crime prevention, and community revitalization.  The strategy is currently implemented in one hundred fifteen sites across the nation.
     The weed and seed strategy is a collaborative effort among law enforcement agencies at the federal, state, and county levels, social service agencies, private businesses, nonprofit organizations, and residents to reclaim, restore, and rebuild communities.  The four key elements of the weed and seed strategy are:
     (1)  Law enforcement;
     (2)  Community policing;
     (3)  Prevention, intervention, and treatment programs; and
     (4)  Neighborhood restoration.
     The weed and seed strategy works with local law enforcement to prevent, control, and reduce violent crime, drug abuse, and gang activity in targeted neighborhoods by "weeding" out the criminal element in the community.  Community policing involves having police officers work closely with community residents to develop solutions to violent and drug-related crimes.  "Seeding" the community involves collaboration among various human services organizations to implement prevention, intervention treatment, and neighborhood revitalization projects, programs, and activities.
     The legislature finds that the State has benefited greatly from weed and seed programs at sites on Oahu that encompass Ala Moana, Chinatown, downtown Honolulu, Kalihi, Waipahu, and Ewa Beach.  Since the implementation of the strategy, crime in those areas has been reduced significantly.  The legislature further finds that the strategy's success warrants maintaining the operations of the weed and seed program in these communities, and envisions expanding it to other communities in the future.
     The purpose of this Act is to:
     (1)  Establish a permanent weed and seed program within the department of labor and industrial relations to continue its success; and
     (2)  Appropriate funds for a grant to the Young Men's Christian Association of Honolulu to maintain the operations of the weed and seed program in the Ala Moana, Chinatown, downtown Honolulu, Kalihi, Waipahu, and Ewa Beach communities on Oahu.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 371, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§371-     Weed and seed program; established.  (a)  There is established within the department of labor and industrial relations the weed and seed program to reduce crime and improve the quality of life for residents and neighborhoods in the State.  The program shall be a collaborative effort among residents, law enforcement agencies, social service providers, educators, area businesses, and other resource agencies and support organizations to:
     (1)  Create, initiate, implement, and support responsible, community-based activities, projects, and services that help reduce crime and drug use in neighborhoods;
     (2)  Engage members of the community to encourage the development and maintenance of economic and social well-being; and
     (3)  Teach and model collaborative efforts that focus on sustainable results.
     (b)  The state weed and seed program shall be guided by an advisory committee composed of representatives from various public and private sectors, including but not limited to:
     (1)  Federal agencies such as the United States Attorney's Office, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
     (2)  State agencies such as the department of education, department of health, department of human services, department of public safety, Hawaii public housing authority, the office of the governor, and the office of the lieutenant governor;
     (3)  County agencies such as the office of the mayor, managing director, office of special projects, the prosecuting attorney, and the chief of police;
     (4)  Community and trade organizations such as Aloha United Way, Young Men's Christian Association of Honolulu, Honolulu Board of Realtors, Tax Foundation of Hawaii, and other health, human services, and trade organizations; and
     (5)  Private businesses and corporate entities.
     (c)  No later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session of the legislature, the weed and seed advisory committee shall submit a report to the legislature and the governor on its activities, including projects completed or ongoing, funds expended, and other relevant data or information on the program."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $336,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to the Young Men's Christian Association of Honolulu to maintain the operations of the weed and seed program in the Ala Moana, Chinatown, downtown Honolulu, Kalihi, Waipahu, and Ewa Beach communities on Oahu.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of labor and industrial relations through a contract with the YMCA of Honolulu for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 

 
Report Title:
Weed and Seed Program; Permanent Establishment; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a permanent weed and seed program within DLIR.  Appropriates funds as a grant to maintain the operations of the weed and seed program in the Ala Moana, Chinatown, downtown Honolulu, Kalihi, Waipahu, and Ewa beach communities on Oahu.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
