HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1541
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FAMILY PLANNING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that fertility awareness is a method of natural family planning that is an inexpensive alternative to prescription contraception medications or costly sterilization surgeries such as hysterectomy and vasectomy.  Fertility awareness is a method that couples may use to determining the time of the month that the woman is most fertile, and then use this information to either plan or prevent pregnancy.  Fertility awareness is also beneficial for women who wish to prevent pregnancy without the use of hormone medications or other drugs.  The legislature further finds that fertility awareness can be ninety-eight per cent effective if practiced correctly.  The legislature also finds that, as an alternative form of birth control, fertility awareness may reduce health care costs related to prescription medications and surgeries to prevent pregnancy.
     The purpose of this Act is to require physicians to offer information on fertility awareness to patients prior to prescribing a contraceptive medication or performing a sterilization surgery.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 453, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§453-     Fertility awareness; information required.  (a)  Effective July 1, 2011, a physician or surgeon licensed under this chapter, prior to:
     (1)  Prescribing any contraception or birth control medication to a patient; or
     (2)  Performing any medical procedure or surgery that will render a patient sterile or unable to produce children; provided that the medical procedure or surgery is not medically necessary;
shall provide to the patient detailed information describing fertility awareness.
     (b)  For the purposes of this section, "fertility awareness" means a method of natural family planning used to determine the fertile and infertile phases of a woman's menstrual cycle to avoid or achieve pregnancy.
     (c)  Any physician or surgeon licensed pursuant to this chapter who violates, this section shall:
     (1)  Pay a fine of $1,000 for each violation;
     (2)  Forfeit any reimbursement provided by a public or private health insurer; and
     (3)  Be subject to disciplinary action by the Hawaii medical board pursuant to section 453-8.5."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
By Request
 

 
Report Title:
Fertility Awareness; Physicians and Surgeons
 
Description:
Requires physicians and surgeons to provide information on fertility awareness to a patient before prescribing contraception medication or performing a procedure to render the patient unable to produce children.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
