HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1667
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TAXATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to authorize a state income tax credit for certain expenses paid or incurred by school teachers in connection with supplementary materials used by the teacher in the classroom.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 235, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§235-    Certain expenses of school teachers; tax credit.  (a)  There shall be allowed to each qualified taxpayer subject to the tax imposed by this chapter a tax credit for certain expenses of school teachers which shall be deductible from the taxpayer's net income tax liability, if any, imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which the credit is properly claimed.
     (b)  For purposes of this section:
     "Certain expenses" means expenses paid or incurred by a qualified taxpayer that incurs expenses in connection with books, supplies (other than nonathletic supplies for courses of instruction in health or physical education), computer equipment (including related software and services) and other equipment, and supplementary materials used by the qualified taxpayer in the classroom.
     "Qualified taxpayer" means a school teacher, special education teacher, school librarian, or counselor employed by the state public education system, or by a private school in Hawaii that instructs students between kindergarten and twelfth grade.
     (c)  The amount of the tax credit shall be equal to a maximum of $500 for certain expenses in any taxable year.
     (d)  If the tax credit under this section exceeds the taxpayer's net income tax liability, the excess of credit over liability may be used as a tax credit against the taxpayer's net income tax liability in subsequent years until exhausted.  All claims for a tax credit under this section, including amended claims, shall be filed on or before the end of the twelfth month following the close of the taxable year for which the tax credit may be claimed.  Failure to comply with the foregoing provision shall constitute a waiver of the right to claim the tax credit.
     (e)  No other tax credit may be claimed under this chapter for the qualified costs used to properly claim a tax credit under this section for the taxable year.
     (f)  The director of taxation shall prepare any forms that may be necessary to claim a credit under this section.  The director may also require the taxpayer to furnish information to ascertain the validity of the claim for the tax credit made under this section and may adopt rules necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section pursuant to chapter 91.
     (g)  The tax credit allowable in this section shall be available for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act, upon its approval, shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Tax Credit; Certain Expenses; Teachers
 
Description:
Authorizes a state income tax credit for certain expenses paid or incurred by a school teacher during the taxable year.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
