HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1645
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO BUSINESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that it is lagging in economic growth and creation of new high-paying jobs.
     The purpose of this Act is to assist in the job creation process by establishing an office of entrepreneurship and job creation in office of the governor.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
OFFICE OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND JOB CREATION
     §   -1  Definitions.  For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:
     "Applicant" means any person acting on the person's own behalf or who is authorized to act on behalf of any other person for the purpose of securing required permits to engage in business activities in the State.
     "Office" means the office of entrepreneurship and job creation established in section    -2.
     "Permit" means any license, certificate, registration, or any other form of authorization required by a federal, state, or county department or agency to engage in any business activity, excluding vocational and professional occupational licenses, certificates, or registration and environmental permits.
     "Person" means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, association, cooperative, corporation, nonprofit organization, and any other organization required to obtain one or more permits for the conduct of its business activities.
     "Small business" means a for-profit enterprise consisting of fewer than one hundred full-time or part-time employees.
     "State agency" means any department, board, bureau, commission, division, office, council, or agency of the State, a public benefit corporation, or public authority having at least one member appointed by the governor.
     §   -2  Office of entrepreneurship and job creation established; staff.  (a)  There is established within the office of the governor an office of entrepreneurship and job creation that shall serve the needs of the small business community through promotion, planning, and the providing of services to assist small businesses in understanding and participating in job growth through permit application processing and public procurements in the State.
     (b)  The office shall be headed by a small business czar who shall be appointed by the governor without regard to chapter 76 and shall serve at the governor's pleasure and without compensation.  The small business czar may employ such other personnel as are required to carry out the functions of the center under this chapter.
     §   -3  General functions; powers and duties.  The office shall have the following functions, powers, and duties:
     (1)  Meet regularly with the small business community to align state policies to job creation policies;
     (2)  Provide comprehensive information on permits required for business activities in the State;
     (3)  Provide comprehensive information on the public procurement process;
     (4)  Facilitate contacts between the applicant and state agencies with permit or procurement functions;
     (5)  Establish a collaborative network with other business service organizations and chambers of commerce to assure the voice of small business is represented at the highest policy levels of government;
     (6)  Provide an annual report on "the state of small business" to the office of the governor;
     (7)  Research, compile, and maintain a file of current bids and proposals for public contracts solicited by state and county agencies and military defense contracts of the United States Department of Defense;
     (8)  Make regular public pronouncements and promotional activities to motivate and inform the Hawaii small business community about the importance of and the mechanics of implementing job creation policies;
     (9)  Publicize the center's services to the public, and provide information on its services for inclusion in any public informational material for permits provided by a state agency.
     §   -4  Cooperation from state agencies.  The small business czar may request and shall be entitled to receive from any state agency, such assistance, services, facilities, or support personnel and data the small business czar deems necessary to carry out the duties of the office.
     §   -5  Immunity from liability.  The opinions offered and the services rendered by the office under this chapter shall be considered facilitative in nature and the office shall not be liable for any consequences resulting from any advice dispensed from the office."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Office of the Governor; Small Business
 
Description:
Establishes and funds the Office of Entrepreneurship and Job Creation and the position of small business czar in the Office of the Governor.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
