HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
160
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HUMAN SERVICES AND HEALTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  According to the executive office on aging, the elderly population in Hawaii is one of the fastest growing in the country.  Between 1990 and 2000, the number of persons aged sixty and older increased by nineteen per cent, compared to a nationwide increase of nine per cent.  Studies conducted by the executive office on aging and the four county area agencies on aging have indicated that the elderly in Hawaii have a significant need for assistance in various areas and this need is outpacing the ability to provide assistance.  Significant issues that arise with elderly people include health status, changes in family structure (caregivers), social security stability for the future, fear of health care burdens (financial stability), and changes in public responsibility.  Case management and needs assessments of older adults are required to mold programs and services to meet the needs of the elderly community.  As Hawaii's culture and values revolve around family, most caregiving of the elderly in Hawaii is provided by family members, which poses financial hardships for these family members.  Financial stability and burden are the main issues for the elderly and their caregivers and families.  Long-term care services are expensive and the high cost for services may lead to changes in living arrangements and family households, especially in Hawaii.
     The Kupuna Care program was established in 1999 as a collaborative effort by several agencies in Hawaii to address the needs of the aging population and the issues arising from those needs.  The program is home- and community-based, designed to address the increased need for affordable long‑term care and the desire to remain in the community.  Kupuna Care is considered to be an alternative to the traditional long‑term care options, which include hospitals, nursing homes, adult residential care homes, adult foster homes, hospice, senior housing, public guardianship, and other programs administered by other state offices.  The goal of Kupuna Care is to give Hawaii's elderly population access to affordable and quality home- and community-based services that are client-centered and family-supportive, allowing the elderly to live with independence and dignity. The nine core services that are offered, which are a reflection of the greatest need, are:
     (1)  Adult day care;
     (2)  Attendant care;
     (3)  Case management;
     (4)  Chore;
     (5)  Homemaker;
     (6)  Personal care;
     (7)  Assisted transportation;
     (8)  Kupuna Care transportation; and
     (9)  Home delivered meals.
     In 2008, thousands of elderly people were served by Kupuna Care.  According to the state program report for fiscal year 2008 as prepared by the executive office on aging, 3,277 meals were delivered to homes, 1,744 elders were served by case managers, 874 elders used personal care, and 597 elders used the homemaker services.  Kupuna Care fills an important gap in assistance for the elderly in Hawaii and cuts in service would be detrimental to their ability to live with independence and dignity.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $2,963,411 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to provide additional funding for the Kupuna Care program.  This funding shall be in addition to the $4,854,350 executive office on aging base budget.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Kupuna Care; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates additional funding for the Kupuna Care program.  Effective 7/1/11.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
