HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1649
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TEACHERS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 302A-624, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§302A-624  Teachers' salary schedule.  (a)  The salary schedule for all teachers of the department shall be negotiated pursuant to section 89-9.
     (b)  All teachers shall meet the following requirements:
     (1)  A teacher shall earn at least five credits within a three-year cycle to receive increment or longevity step increases in the third year of the three-year cycle;
     (2)  A teacher who fails to meet the requirement set forth in paragraph (1) shall not be eligible for any increment or longevity step increases until the teacher earns the credit requirement for the three-year cycle;
     (3)  Any credit earned in excess of any three-year credit requirement may not be carried over beyond the three-year cycle; and
     (4)  Credits earned may be in the form of in-service, university, or other credits approved by the department.
     (c)  A teacher shall be required to spend at least one year in Class III before going on to Class IV, at least one year in Class IV before going on to Class V, at least one year in Class V before going on to Class VI, and at least one year in Class VI before going on to Class VII.
     (d)  In case of promotion from a teaching position to an educational officer, the employee shall receive compensation at the lowest step of the higher grade that exceeds the employee's existing compensation by at least eight per cent if such a step exists.
     (e)  Effective retroactively to July 1, 2006, the minimum hourly or minimum per diem rate for substitute teachers shall be [determined by the legislature] as follows; provided that any individual in Class I, II, or III who works less than a full seven-hour work day as a substitute teacher or part-time teacher shall be compensated on a pro-rated, hourly basis:
     (1)  Class I:  other individuals who do not possess a bachelor's degree shall be compensated at [a rate of not less than $125 for a full work day;] an hourly or per diem rate that represents ninety-five per cent of a pro-rated share of the annual compensation paid for the first year of work to a licensed teacher with a bachelor's degree;
     (2)  Class II:  individuals with a bachelor's degree or higher advanced degree shall be compensated at [a rate of not less than $136 for a full work day;] an hourly or per diem rate that represents one-hundred per cent of a pro-rate share of the annual compensation paid for the first year of work to a licensed teacher with a bachelor's degree; and
     (3)  Class III:  former department of education teachers, or licensed or highly qualified teachers, shall be compensated at [a rate of not less than $147 for a full work day.] an hourly or per diem rate that represents one-hundred and ten per cent of a pro-rated share of the annual compensation paid for the first year of work to a licensed teacher with a bachelor's degree.
     (f)  [Effective July 1, 2008, the board shall provide wage adjustments for substitute teachers.  The wage adjustments shall be comparable to the across-the-board wage adjustments for teachers that are negotiated for bargaining unit (5) subject to legislative approval, pursuant to section 89C-5.]  The board may [also] adjust hours, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment for substitute teachers.
     (g)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, substitute teachers and part-time teachers who worked for the department of education between November 8, 2000, and June 30, 2006, who were underpaid by the department of education will be entitled to interest on the underpaid wages pursuant to section 478-2."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Compensation; Part-time Teacher; Substitute Teacher
 
 
Description:
Determines the hourly and per diem rate of compensation for substitute and part-time teachers, and requires back-pay for substitute or part-time teachers who were underpaid.
 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
