HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1606
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Public Law No. 111-148) and the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 (Public Law No. 111-152) will result in significant consequences to patients and providers of behavioral health services programs.  The legislature also finds that Hawaii's laws, programs, and services must be amended to comply.
     The legislature finds that the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration strongly urges states to proactively develop policies that will comply with the new federal health care laws.  In order to receive funding assistance, Hawaii must engage in active reform.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a two year behavioral health services task force to provide guidance and information to the legislature so it can properly plan and implement health care reform specific to behavioral health.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established the behavioral health services task force within the department of health for administrative purposes.
     (b)  The behavioral health services task force shall consist of the following members:
     (1)  Two members appointed by the governor from a list of physicians submitted by the senate president and the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (2)  Two members of the senate, to be appointed by the president of the senate;
     (3)  Two members of the house of representatives, to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (4)  The attorney general or the attorney general's designee;
     (5)  The director of health or the director's designee;
     (6)  The chief of the alcohol and drug abuse division of the department of health or the chief's designee;
     (7)  The chief of the adult mental health division of the department of health or the chief's designee;
     (8)  The insurance commissioner, or the commissioner's designee;
     (9)  Three representatives from local health insurance providers;
    (10)  One member from the Hawaii Medical Association; and
    (11)  One member from the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition.
     (c)  The task force shall:
     (1)  Plan and implement health care reform that is specific to behavioral health service programs;
     (2)  Examine state policies and procedures and define a direction more favorable to the use of medicaid funding;
     (3)  Examine state insurance laws and determine a way to integrate specialized treatment programs and primary care systems; and
     (4)  Organize and participate in an implementation team to carry out the goals of the task force, using recommendations from the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
     (d)  The members of the task force shall select the chairperson of the task force from among themselves.  Members of the task force shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their official duties.
     (e)  The task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 regular session.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that this Act shall be repealed on June 30, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Behavioral Health Services; Health Care Reform; Task Force
 
Description:
Creates a two year behavioral health services task force to plan and implement health care reform specific to behavioral health.  Task force to be repealed on June 30, 2013.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
