HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1793
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CONSERVATION AND RESOURCES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 183, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART
SANDALWOOD
     §183-A  Duties; sandalwood.  In addition to the duties listed in section 183-1.5, the department shall:
     (1)  Support reforestation efforts throughout the State for all native sandalwood species with the objective of replenishing native sandalwood species forests to the level that those forests existed prior to 1800;
     (2)  Provide incentives to local entrepreneurs to cultivate native sandalwood species in plantations for either reforestation programs or commercial operations;
     (3)  Provide support for programs that ensure the sustainability of commercial sandalwood operations in the State; and
     (4)  Enforce penalties against persons who violate this part.
     §183-B  Destruction or harvesting of sandalwood trees.  (a)  It shall be unlawful to destroy or harvest a tree of a native sandalwood species that is determined by the department to have been in existence prior to the year 1778.
     (b)  It shall be unlawful to destroy or harvest a tree of a native sandalwood species not described in subsection (a) without a license issued by the department.
     (c)  Any person who destroys or harvests a native sandalwood species tree shall replant native sandalwood species trees in an amount equal to the total estimated age of all trees destroyed or harvested; provided that the department shall monitor the replanting efforts and the success rate of the seedlings that are replanted.
     (d)  It shall be unlawful to export raw or unprocessed timber of any native sandalwood species outside the State.
     §183-C  Fees.  (a)  Any person licensed pursuant to section 183-B(b) who harvests trees of a native sandalwood species for commercial purposes shall pay to the department a fee equal to       per cent of the dollar value of the sandalwood or sandalwood products harvested or sold.
     (b)  All fees collected pursuant to subsection (a) shall be deposited in the treasury of the State for use by the department for forestry purposes and all such sums as may be so collected and deposited are appropriated for those purposes.
     §183-D  Criminal penalties.  Any person who violates section 183-B, upon conviction thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $          or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.  In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, a fine of up to $        shall be levied for each tree illegally destroyed or harvested under section 183‑B."
     SECTION 2.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Sandalwood; DLNR
 
Description:
Establishes penalties for the destruction or harvesting of native sandalwood trees.  Requires replanting for trees harvested.  Bans the export of raw or unprocessed sandalwood timber.  Establishes DLNR policies regarding sandalwood.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
