HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1718
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAII-GROWN PRODUCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 141, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§141-     Farm-to-school program.  (a)  There is established within the department of agriculture a farm-to-school program.  The purpose of the program shall be to increase procurement of Hawaii-grown produce as defined in section 302A-101 by public schools.
     (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the department of agriculture, in consultation with the departments of health, accounting and general services, and education as necessary, may:
     (1)  Coordinate the identification and development of policies and procedures to implement and evaluate the farm-to-school program;
     (2)  Assist in marketing Hawaii-grown produce to schools by informing Hawaii food growers and distributors of food procurement opportunities, bid procedures, school purchasing criteria, and other requirements;
     (3)  Assist schools in connecting with Hawaii growers and distributors by informing the schools of the sources and availability of Hawaii-grown produce as well as the nutritional, environmental, and economic benefits of purchasing Hawaii-grown produce;
     (4)  Identify and recommend mechanisms that will increase the predictability of sales of Hawaii-grown produce for Hawaii growers and distributors and the adequacy of supply for purchasing schools;
     (5)  Identify and encourage the use of existing curricula, programs, and publications to educate students on the nutritional, environmental, and economic benefits of preparing and consuming Hawaii-grown produce;
     (6)  Support efforts to advance other farm-to-school connections such as farmers markets on school grounds, school gardens, and community-supported agriculture; and
     (7)  Seek additional private and public funds to leverage any appropriations."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Preference for Hawaii-grown produce.  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, each public school shall purchase Hawaii-grown produce; provided that a public school may purchase other fruits and vegetables as follows:
     (1)  Hawaii-grown produce is not available within a reasonable period of time;
     (2)  Hawaii-grown produce is not available from a single source in quantities necessary to meet the school's needs;
     (3)  Hawaii-grown produce is not able to meet United States Department of Agriculture requirements;
     (4)  Hawaii-grown produce is only available at a cost greater than three per cent of the cost of comparable produce; or
     (5)  The purchase of Hawaii-grown produce is likely to breach an existing contract or impair a grant or other funding."
     SECTION 3.  Section 302A-101, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new definitions to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
     ""Hawaii-grown produce" means fruits and vegetables grown or raised in the State that are unprocessed, minimally processed, flash frozen, or otherwise prepared and handled to maintain their freshness while providing convenience to the user.
     "Minimally processed foods" means food that has only been cleaned, washed, cut, or portioned."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii-Grown Produce; Farm-to-School
 
Description:
Establishes the farm-to-school program in the department of agriculture to increase the procurement of Hawaii-grown produce.  Requires public schools to purchase Hawaii-grown food when available at a comparable cost.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
