HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1725
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ELEVATOR SAFETY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Recent state budget cuts have resulted in a severe shortage of state elevator inspectors.  There are presently only seven elevator inspectors who are responsible for overseeing the State's six thousand seven hundred elevators and related systems, seventy-eight per cent of which have expired operating permits.  The backlog for inspections is between three and four years.  Although the State has restored funding for ten elevator inspector positions, there is still a shortage of inspectors, which poses a serious risk to public safety.  The legislature finds that at a time when the State is looking for ways to stretch every tax dollar, authorizing third party elevator inspectors to perform elevator safety inspections would improve public safety and lessen the economic burden on the State and its taxpayers.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of labor and industrial relations to authorize third party elevator inspectors to perform elevator safety inspections required by law.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 397, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§397-    Third party elevator inspectors.  (a)  The department shall authorize private third party elevator inspectors to perform elevator safety inspections required under this chapter.  Any private third party elevator inspector authorized to perform elevator safety inspections shall be held to the highest standards of professionalism, quality, and ethics and shall meet the requirements provided under section 397-6(d).
     (b)  Any safety inspection performed by a private third party elevator inspector pursuant to this section shall have the same force and effect of an inspection performed by a deputy elevator inspector who is subject to section 397-6(c) and (d).
     (c)  A private third party elevator inspector may charge a reasonable fee for the inspection, examination, and other services rendered relating to the elevator safety requirements established under this chapter and any rule adopted pursuant to chapter 91 to implement this chapter; provided that any revenue realized from the collection of any fee charged and collected for a permit, certificate, or license required by section 397-5 shall be remitted by the private third party elevator inspector to the director for deposit into the general fund."
     SECTION 3.  Section 397-6, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
     "(c)  All safety inspections required under this chapter of elevators and kindred equipment shall be performed by deputy elevator inspectors of the department or authorized private third party elevator inspectors who are qualified elevator inspectors and who are employed primarily for purposes of elevator and related inspection work."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________

 
Report Title:
Elevators; Third Party Elevator Inspectors
 
Description:
Requires DLIR to authorize private third party elevator inspectors.  Provides minimum standards for private third party elevator inspectors.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
