HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1785
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TAXATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Title.  This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Tax Amnesty Program Act".
     SECTION 2.  Definitions.  As used in this Act:
     "Accounts receivable" means an amount of state tax, penalty, or interest that has been recorded as due and entered in the account records or any ledger maintained in the department or that a taxpayer should reasonably expect to become due as a direct or indirect result of any pending or completed audit or investigation that a taxpayer knows is being conducted by the State.
     "Department" means the department of taxation.
     "Director" means the director of taxation.
     "Final, due, and owing" means an assessment that has become final and is owed to the State, due to either the expiration of a taxpayer's appeal rights or the rendition of the final order by the director or by any court of this State.  Assessments that have been appealed shall be final, due, and owing fifteen days after the last unappealed or unappealable order sustaining the assessment or any part thereof that has become final.  Assessments that have not been appealed shall be final, due, and owing twenty days after service of notice of assessment.
     "Taxpayer" means any individual, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator, fiduciary, or any other entity of any kind subject to any tax in title 14, Hawaii Revised Statutes, or any person required to collect any tax under title 14, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 3.  Tax amnesty program; applicable time period.  (a)  The director shall develop and administer a four-year tax amnesty program as provided in this Act.  The director, upon the voluntary return and remission of taxes and interest owed by any taxpayer, shall waive all penalties that are assessed or subject to being assessed for outstanding liabilities for taxable periods ending or transactions occurring on or before December 31st of the prior calendar year.  The director shall provide by rule, pursuant to chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as necessary, for the administration of this amnesty program and shall provide for necessary forms for the filing of tax amnesty applications and returns.
     (b)  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the tax amnesty program shall begin by October 31, 2012, and shall be completed before January 1, 2016, and shall apply to all taxpayers owing taxes, penalties, or interest administered by the director under title 14, Hawaii Revised Statutes, except that the tax amnesty shall not apply to any real property tax or any tax levied pursuant to chapter 249, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     The program shall apply to tax liabilities for taxable periods ending or transactions occurring on or before December 31st of the prior calendar year.
     SECTION 4.  Eligibility requirements.  (a)  This Act shall apply to any taxpayer who:
     (1)  Files an application for tax amnesty within the time prescribed by the director;
     (2)  Files all returns as may be required by the director for all years or tax reporting periods as stated on the application for which returns have not previously been filed and files all returns as may be required by the director for all years or tax reporting periods for which returns were filed but the tax liability was underreported; and
     (3)  Pays in full the taxes due for the periods and taxes applied for at the time that the tax amnesty application or return is filed within the designated amnesty program period.
In addition, the director may require, by rule, any eligible taxpayer to pay in full, within the amnesty period, all taxes previously assessed by the director that are final, due, and owing at the time the tax amnesty application or return is filed.
     (b)  An eligible taxpayer may participate in the amnesty program if:
     (1)  The taxpayer is under audit, notwithstanding the fact that the amount due is included in a proposed assessment or an assessment, bill, notice, or demand for payment issued by the director; or
     (2)  The amount due is subject to a pending administrative or judicial proceeding.
An eligible taxpayer may participate in the amnesty program to the extent of the uncontested portion of any assessed liability; provided that participation in the program shall be conditioned upon the taxpayer's agreement that the right to protest or initiate an administrative or judicial proceeding or to claim any refund of moneys paid under the program shall be barred with respect to the amounts paid with the tax amnesty application or return.
     (c)  The director shall allow installment payment agreements in cases of severe hardship in lieu of the complete payment required under subsection (a).  In the case of severe hardship, twenty-five per cent of the amount due shall be paid with the tax amnesty application or return, and the balance shall be paid in monthly installments as jointly determined by the taxpayer and the director.  Failure of the taxpayer to make timely installment payments shall void the terms of the tax amnesty.  All agreements and payments shall not include interest due and accruing during the installment agreement.
     SECTION 5.  Amnesty provisions.  (a)  Amnesty shall be granted for any taxpayer who meets the requirements of section 4 of this Act in accordance with the following:
     (1)  For taxes that are owed as a result of the nonreporting or underreporting of tax liabilities or the nonpayment of any accounts receivable owed by an eligible taxpayer, the State shall waive criminal prosecution and all civil penalties that may be assessed under title 14, Hawaii Revised Statutes, for the taxable years or periods for which the tax amnesty is requested; and
     (2)  With the exception of instances in which the taxpayer and director enter into an installment payment agreement authorized under section 4(c) of this Act, the failure to pay all taxes as shown on the taxpayer's amnesty tax return shall invalidate any amnesty granted pursuant to this Act.
     (b)  This Act shall not apply to any taxpayer who is subject to a current criminal investigation for nonpayment, delinquency, evasion, or fraud in relation to any federal taxes or to any of the taxes to which this amnesty program is applicable.
     (c)  No refund or credit shall be granted for any interest or penalty paid prior to the time the taxpayer requests amnesty pursuant to section 4 of this Act.
     (d)  Unless the director, in the director's discretion, redetermines the amount of taxes and interest due, no refund or credit shall be granted for any taxes or interest paid under the amnesty program.
     SECTION 6.  Public awareness.  The director shall adopt rules under chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes, as necessary, issue forms and instructions, and take all actions necessary to implement this Act.  The director shall publicize the tax amnesty program in accordance with section 1-28.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, in order to maximize the public awareness of, and participation in, the program.  In addition, the director, for the purpose of publicizing the tax amnesty program, may contract with any advertising agency within or outside the State.
     SECTION 7.  Separate accounting.  For purposes of accounting for the revenues received pursuant to this Act, the director shall maintain an accounting and reporting of funds collected under the tax amnesty program.  All funds collected shall be remitted to the general fund.
     SECTION 8.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; and shall be repealed on January 1, 2016; provided that any tax amnesty granted pursuant to this Act and any installment payment agreement executed pursuant to section 4(c) of this Act shall remain in force.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Taxation; Amnesty
 
Description:
Establishes a 4-year amnesty program for certain delinquent tax obligations.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
