HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1780
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AQUATIC LIFE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 188, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§188-     Selling of aquatic life for aquarium purposes prohibited; penalties; fines.  (a)  For the purposes of this section:
     "Aquarium fish collection" means the collection of any marine or freshwater aquatic life.
     "Aquarium fish permit" means a permit issued by the board of land and natural resources for the taking of aquatic life and for the use of fine mesh nets and traps to take salt water fish, freshwater non-game fish, or other aquatic life for aquarium purposes.
     "Aquarium purposes" means to hold salt water fish, freshwater non-game fish, or other aquatic life alive in a state of captivity as pets, for scientific study, for public exhibition or display for public education, or for sale for these purposes.
     "Aquatic life" means any type or species of mammal, fish, amphibian, reptile, mollusk, crustacean, arthropod, invertebrate, coral, or other animal that inhabits the freshwater or marine environment and includes any part, product, egg, or offspring thereof; or freshwater or marine plants, including seeds, roots, products, and other parts thereof.
     "Department" means the department of land and natural resources.
     "Sell" means to transfer, prescribe, give, or deliver to another, to leave, barter, or exchange with another, or to offer or agree to do the same to another for consideration.
     "Take" or "taken" means to fish, catch, capture, confine, or harvest aquatic life, or attempt to fish, catch, capture, confine, or harvest aquatic life.
     (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to knowingly or intentionally sell or offer to sell, for aquarium purposes, aquatic life taken from any of the waters within the jurisdiction of the State.
     (c)  This section shall not apply to a person exercising a customary and traditional right for subsistence, cultural, or religious purposes, subject to the right of the State to regulate that right, including native Hawaiian gathering rights and traditional cultural practices as authorized by law or as permitted by the State pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the Hawaii state constitution.
     (d)  This section shall not apply to the taking of aquatic life for human consumption or for sale for human consumption, including the use of bait.
     (e)  This section shall not prohibit special activity permits allowed under section 187A-6; provided that the permit issued is for the bona fide purpose of scientific research or for display in a public aquarium operated for the benefit of public education.
     (f)  Any person violating this section or any rule adopted pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished as follows:
     (1)  For a first offense, by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment of not more than thirty days, or both;
     (2)  For a second offense within five years of a previous violation, by a fine of not more than $2,000 or by imprisonment of not more than sixty days, or both; and
     (3)  For a third or subsequent violation within five years of a previous violation, by a fine of not more than $3,000 or by imprisonment of not more than ninety days, or both.
     (g)  In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, a person violating this section shall be subject to:
     (1)  An administrative fine of not more than $1,000 for each aquatic life specimen sold;
     (2)  Seizure and forfeiture of any taken aquatic life specimens, commercial marine license, vessel, and equipment; and
     (3)  Assessment of administrative fees and costs, and attorney’s fees and costs.
     (h)  The division of aquatic resources of the department shall submit an annual report on the effectiveness and enforcement of this section to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session."
     SECTION 2.  Section 188-31, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§188-31  Permits to take aquatic life for aquarium purposes.  (a)  Except as prohibited by law, the department, upon receipt of a written application, may issue an aquarium fish permit, not longer than one year in duration, to take aquatic life and to use fine meshed traps, or fine meshed nets other than throw nets, for the taking of marine or freshwater nongame fish and other aquatic life for aquarium purposes[.]; provided that:
     [(b)] (1)  [Except as prohibited by law, the] The permits shall be issued only to persons who can satisfy the department that they possess facilities to and can maintain fish and other aquatic life alive and in reasonable health[.] and who can satisfy the department that the methods of capture, husbandry, and transport are humane and will not result in substantial injury to or death of the taken aquatic life;
     (2)  No person shall take aquatic life for aquarium purposes or use fine meshed traps or fine meshed nets other than throw nets to take marine or freshwater non-game fish and other aquatic life for aquarium purposes without an aquarium fish permit; and
     (3)  No person shall puncture the swim bladder or clip the fins of marine or freshwater fish taken for aquarium purposes.  Any aquatic life collected for aquarium purposes shall be handled in a humane manner.
     [(c)] (b)  It shall be illegal to sell or offer for sale any fish and other aquatic life taken under an aquarium fish permit unless those fish and other aquatic life are sold alive for a public aquarium [purposes.] for public education.
     (c)  The department may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 for the purpose of this section.
     [(d)  For the purposes of this section:
     (1)  "Aquarium purposes" means to hold salt water fish, freshwater nongame fish, or other aquatic life alive in a state of captivity as pets, for scientific study, or for public exhibition or display, or for sale for these purposes; and
     (2)  "Aquarium fish permit" means a permit issued by the board for the use of fine mesh nets and traps to take salt water fish, freshwater nongame fish, or other aquatic life for aquarium purposes.]"
     SECTION 3.  Section 188F-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§188F-4[]]  West Hawaii regional fishery management area plan.  The department shall develop a West Hawaii regional fishery management area plan that identifies and designates appropriate areas of the management area as follows:
     (1)  Designates a minimum of [thirty] one hundred per cent of coastal waters in the West Hawaii regional fishery management area as fish replenishment areas in which aquarium fish collection is prohibited;
     (2)  Establishes a day-use mooring buoy system along the coastline of the West Hawaii regional fishery management area and designates some high-use areas where no anchoring is allowed;
     (3)  Establishes a portion of the fish replenishment areas as fish reserves where no fishing of reef-dwelling fish is allowed; [and]
     (4)  Designates areas where the use of gill nets as set nets shall be prohibited[.];
     (5)  Identifies the West Hawai‘i regional fishery management area as the area from the northernmost point of the west coast to the southernmost point of the west coast of the island of Hawaii, and out from the high water line to fifteen hundred meters depth;
     (6)  Prohibits the collection of reef-dwelling aquatic life except for human consumption or for sale for human consumption, including the use of bait; and
     (7)  This section shall not apply to a person exercising a customary and traditional right for subsistence, cultural, or religious purposes, subject to the right of the State to regulate that right, including native Hawaiian gathering rights and traditional cultural practices as authorized by law or as permitted by the State pursuant to article XI, section 7 of the Hawaii state constitution."
     SECTION 4.  Section 189-11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§189-11  Receipts in duplicate.  Every commercial marine dealer shall issue receipts to the person from whom marine life is obtained and shall provide the following information in the receipt:
     (1)  The date of the issuance;
     (2)  The name of the person to whom the receipt is issued;
     (3)  The following information with respect to each of the varieties of marine life as the department shall require including:
         (A)  The weight in pounds of each of the varieties received;
         (B)  The numbers of marine life when they average a pound or more; and
         (C)  The price per pound paid; and
        [(D)  With regard to aquarium fish, regardless of weight, the number and species of the fishes; and]
     (4)  The signature of the dealer who issues the receipt.
Any dealer taking the dealer's own marine life or handling any marine life taken by commercial marine licensees working for or with the dealer, shall make out the same receipt, giving market price for the marine life as prevails on the date of receipt.  A duplicate copy of this receipt shall be kept on file at the premise where the marine life was sold by the dealer issuing the same for a period of twelve months from the date of issuance, and the duplicate copy shall be available for inspection upon the demand of any conservation officer authorized to enforce the laws of the State."
     SECTION 5.  Section 188-31.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is repealed.
     ["[§188-31.5]  Aquarium fish for export; monthly count.  The department of land and natural resources shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to monitor the aquarium fish catch report and fish dealer's report for export of aquarium fish taken from the waters of the State for aquarium purposes pursuant to section 188-31.  A monthly count of the quantities taken of each individual species of aquarium fish exported shall be reported to the board."]
     SECTION 6.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 7.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 8.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
By Request
 

 
Report Title:
Aquatic Life; Sale; Prohibition; Kauai County Package
 
Description:
Prohibits the sale of aquatic life for aquarium purposes.  Establishes penalties.  Requires the division of aquatic resources to submit an annual report on the effectiveness of enforcement.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
