HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1721
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO BIRDS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that feral birds in large flocks create large amounts of droppings that may interfere with the private enjoyment of public urban districts.  The droppings also make public walkways unsafe, unsanitary, and potentially hazardous due to parasites or disease that may be contaminated in the bird droppings.
     The legislature finds that feral birds, such as the common pigeon, represent a significant health risk to the general public.  Feral birds are carriers of several contagious diseases and are hosts to fleas and mites, and other pests, all of which may be readily transmitted to humans.  The common pigeon is known to carry over a dozen different disease organisms that are harmful to man.  Some of these diseases can also be transmitted by bird feces.  A pigeon's nesting debris is usually made up of its own feces and attracts other various pests such as rats, cockroaches, and maggots.
     Long-term reduction of feral pigeon populations may be achieved by restricting food supply, which involves legislation and litter control.  The legislature finds that the feeding of feral birds is directly linked to the overpopulation of feral pigeons in urban districts.  The legislature further finds that restricting access to foods is an important factor in maintaining balance in the feral bird population in urban areas.
     It is the intent of the legislature to discourage the feeding of feral birds by making the feeding of feral birds a misdemeanor offense punishable by a civil fine.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 321, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§321-     Prohibition on feeding feral birds.  (a)  It shall be a violation to feed feral birds in urban districts in the State.
     (b)  Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a civil fine of $     .
     (c)  This section shall not affect rights and permits under chapter 142.
     (d)  For purposes of this section:
     "Feral birds" means any non-domesticated avian; including but not limited to pigeons.
     "Feed" means to provide or distribute food, including but not limited to grain, seeds, breadcrumbs, garbage, or other miscellaneous food items.
     "Urban district" means any land area characterized by higher population density and not limited to metropolitan areas."
     SECTION 3.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Birds; Feeding, Urban Districts; Prohibition
 
Description:
Makes feeding of feral birds in urban districts a misdemeanor subject to a civil fine.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
