HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1797
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CONDITIONAL RELEASE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to establish a tolling provision when a defendant charged with a petty misdemeanor, misdemeanor, or violation is granted conditional release on grounds of physical or mental defect.
     SECTION 2.  Section 704-411, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (1) to read as follows:
     "(1)  When a defendant is acquitted on the ground of physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect excluding responsibility, the court, on the basis of the report made pursuant to section 704-404, if uncontested, or the medical or psychological evidence given at the trial or at a separate hearing, shall order that:
    (a)   The defendant shall be committed to the custody of the director of health to be placed in an appropriate institution for custody, care, and treatment if the court finds that the defendant:
              (i)  Is affected by a physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect;
             (ii)  Presents a risk of danger to self or others; and
            (iii)  Is not a proper subject for conditional release;
          provided that the director of health shall place defendants charged with misdemeanors or felonies not involving violence or attempted violence in the least restrictive environment appropriate in light of the defendant's treatment needs and the need to prevent harm to the person confined and others.  The county police departments shall provide to the director of health and the defendant, copies of all police reports from cases filed against the defendant that have been adjudicated by the acceptance of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, a finding of guilt, acquittal, acquittal pursuant to section 704-400, or by the entry of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere made pursuant to chapter 853, so long as the disclosure to the director of health and the defendant does not frustrate a legitimate function of the county police departments; provided that expunged records, records of or pertaining to any adjudication or disposition rendered in the case of a juvenile, or records containing data from the United States National Crime Information Center shall not be provided.  The county police departments shall segregate or sanitize from the police reports information that would result in the likelihood or actual identification of individuals who furnished information in connection with the investigation or who were of investigatory interest.  Records shall not be re-disclosed except to the extent permitted by law;
    (b)   The defendant shall be granted conditional release with conditions as the court deems necessary if the court finds that the defendant is affected by physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect and that the defendant presents a danger to self or others, but that the defendant can be controlled adequately and given proper care, supervision, and treatment if the defendant is released on condition.  For any defendant granted conditional release pursuant to this paragraph, and who was charged with a petty misdemeanor, misdemeanor, or violation, the period of conditional release shall be no longer than one year[;], subject to the following tolling provisions:
              (i)  Upon the filing of a motion to revoke conditional release or a motion to modify the conditions imposed thereby, the period of conditional release shall be tolled pending the hearing upon the motion and the decision of the court.  The period of tolling shall be computed from the filing date of the motion, through and including the filing date of the written order of the court concerning the motion, for purposes of computation of the remaining period of conditional release, if any.  During the period of tolling of conditional release, the defendant shall remain subject to all terms and conditions of conditional release, except as otherwise provided by this chapter; and
             (ii)  If the court, following hearing, refuses to revoke the conditional release or grant the requested modification, the defendant may be granted the period of tolling of conditional release for purposes of computation of the remaining conditional release, if any; or
    (c)   The defendant shall be discharged if the court finds that the defendant is no longer affected by physical or mental disease, disorder, or defect or, if so affected, that the defendant no longer presents a danger to self or others and is not in need of care, supervision, or treatment."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Judiciary Package; Conditional Release; Tolling
 
Description:
Requires tolling of one‑year conditional release period upon filing of motion for revocation of conditional release or motion to modify conditions.
 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
