HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
173
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO NOMINATION PAPERS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 12-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  No candidate's name shall be printed upon any official ballot to be used at any primary, special primary, or special election unless a nomination paper was filed in the candidate's behalf and in the name by which the candidate is commonly known.  The nomination paper shall be in a form prescribed and provided by the chief election officer containing substantially the following information:
     (1)  A statement by the registered voters signing the form that they are eligible to vote for the candidate;
     (2)  A statement by the registered voters signing the form that they nominate the candidate for the office identified on the nomination paper issued to the candidate;
     (3)  The residence address and county in which the candidate resides;
     (4)  The legal name of the candidate, the name by which the candidate is commonly known, if different, the office for which the candidate is running, and the candidate's party affiliation or nonpartisanship; all of which are to be placed on the nomination paper by the chief election officer or the clerk prior to releasing the form to the candidate;
     (5)  Space for the name, signature, date of birth, last four digits of the social security number, and residence address of each registered voter signing the form, and other information as determined by the chief election officer; provided that no more than the last four digits of a voter's social security number shall be required;
     (6)  A sworn certification by self-subscribing oath by the candidate that the candidate qualifies under the law for the office the candidate is seeking and that the candidate has determined that, except for the information provided by the registered voters signing the nomination papers, all of the information on the nomination papers is true and correct;
     (7)  A sworn certification by self-subscribing oath by a party candidate that the candidate is a member of the party;
     (8)  For candidates seeking elective county office, a sworn certification by self-subscribing oath by the candidate that the candidate has complied with all provisions of the relevant county charter and county ordinances pertaining to elected officials;
    [(8)] (9)  A sworn certification by self-subscribing oath, where applicable, by the candidate that the candidate has complied with the provisions of article II, section 7, of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii;
    [(9)] (10) A sworn certification by self-subscribing oath by the candidate that the candidate is in compliance with section 831-2, dealing with felons, and is eligible to run for office; and
   [(10)] (11) The name the candidate wishes printed on the ballot and the mailing address of the candidate."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Nomination Papers; Candidates for Elective County Office
 
Description:
Requires candidates for elective county office to include in their nomination papers a sworn certification of compliance with any relevant provisions of the county charter or ordinances.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
