HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1767
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SIMULATED FIREARMS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

SECTION 1.  Section 707-700, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new definition to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
""Simulated firearm" means any object that:
     (1)  Substantially resembles a firearm;
     (2)  Can reasonably be perceived to be a firearm; or
     (3)  Is used or brandished as a firearm."
     SECTION 2.  Section 707-716, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (1) to read as follows:
     "(1)  A person commits the offense of terroristic threatening in the first degree if the person commits terroristic threatening:
    (a)   By threatening another person on more than one occasion for the same or a similar purpose;
    (b)   By threats made in a common scheme against different persons;
    (c)   Against a public servant arising out of the performance of the public servant's official duties.  For the purposes of this paragraph, "public servant" includes but is not limited to an educational worker.  "Educational worker" has the same meaning as defined in section 707-711;
    (d)   Against any emergency medical services provider who is engaged in the performance of duty.  For purposes of this paragraph, "emergency medical services provider" means emergency medical services personnel, as defined in section 321-222, and physicians, physician's assistants, nurses, nurse practitioners, certified registered nurse anesthetists, respiratory therapists, laboratory technicians, radiology technicians, and social workers, providing services in the emergency room of a hospital;
    (e)   With the use of a dangerous instrument[;] or a simulated firearm; or
    (f)   By threatening a person who:
         (i)  The defendant has been restrained from, by order of any court, including an ex parte order, contacting, threatening, or physically abusing pursuant to chapter 586; or
        (ii)  Is being protected by a police officer ordering the defendant to leave the premises of that protected person pursuant to section 709-906(4), during the effective period of that order.
SECTION 3.  Section 708-800, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new definition to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
""Simulated firearm" means any object that:
     (1)  Substantially resembles a firearm;
     (2)  Can reasonably be perceived to be a firearm; or
     (3)  Is used or brandished as a firearm."
     SECTION 4.  Section 708-840, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (1) to read as follows:
     "(1)  A person commits the offense of robbery in the first degree if, in the course of committing theft or non-consensual taking of a motor vehicle:
    (a)   The person attempts to kill another or intentionally or knowingly inflicts or attempts to inflict serious bodily injury upon another;
    (b)   The person is armed with a dangerous instrument or a simulated firearm and:
         (i)  The person uses force against the person of anyone present with intent to overcome that person's physical resistance or physical power of resistance; or
        (ii)  The person threatens the imminent use of force against the person of anyone present with intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with the property;
    (c)   The person uses force against the person of anyone present with the intent to overcome that person's physical resistance or physical power of resistance during the time of a civil defense emergency proclaimed by the governor pursuant to chapter 128, within the area covered by the civil defense emergency or during the period of disaster relief under chapter 127; or
    (d)   The person threatens the imminent use of force against the person of anyone present with intent to compel acquiescence to the taking of or escaping with the property during the time of a civil defense emergency proclaimed by the governor pursuant to chapter 128, within the area covered by the civil defense emergency or during the period of disaster relief under chapter 127."
     SECTION 5.  This Act does not affect the rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 6.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
By Request
 

 
Report Title:
Simulated Firearms; Terroristic Threatening; Robbery
 
Description:
Amends the offenses of terroristic threatening in the first degree and robbery in the first degree to include the use of a simulated firearm.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
