HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1733
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HOMELESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that homeless individuals are often able to improve their personal circumstances when provided with appropriate access to family members or other support groups.  The return-to-home program is intended to assist homeless individuals who are presently in this State to reconnect with support networks ready to receive them in their respective home states.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a temporary return-to-home program for qualified homeless individuals.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part XVII to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346-    Return-to-home program.  (a)  There is established within the department, a voluntary homeless assistance program to be known as the return-to-home program, to assist eligible homeless individuals to return to an individual's home state.  The department shall administer the program.
     (b)  A homeless individual shall be eligible to participate in the program only if the following requirements are met:
     (1)  The individual's participation in the program is completely voluntary;
     (2)  The individual has an established support system in the individual's home state that is willing to receive and assist the individual;
     (3)  The individual, if on parole, probation, or awaiting a court hearing or sentencing, has proper clearance from the relevant court to participate in the program; and
     (4)  The individual is indigent and lacks the financial resources necessary to return to the individual's home state.
     (c)  A homeless individual may participate in the return-to-home program only once and shall sign an agreement to this effect prior to participating in the program.  The agreement shall be maintained by the department.
     (d)  The department shall actively seek to involve airline companies, cruise lines, charter companies, homeless assistance programs, travel agencies, and the visitor industry in the program.
     (e)  The department shall assist each homeless participant in the program with the necessary preparations to return to the individual's home state, including but not limited to acquiring any required identification documents, public transportation to the airport, orientation relating to airport security, and basic personal hygiene.  The department shall ensure that each participant is in sufficient physical and mental health to make the trip back to the participant's home state.  The department shall follow up with each participating homeless individual within one month of the individual's return to the individual's home state to assess the individual's efforts at successful reunification with family or any other support system.
     (f)  By no later than December 31, 2012, the department shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 to develop and implement the return-to-home program."
     SECTION 3.  The department of human services shall evaluate the implementation of the provisions of this Act and submit a report of findings and recommendations to the legislature no less than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2014.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to implement the return-to-home program, including all program costs and the hiring of necessary staff.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012, and shall be repealed on June 30, 2014.
 
 INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Homeless; Return-to-Home Program; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes on a temporary basis the return-to-home program to assist homeless individuals participating in the program to return to their home states if there is a support network available to receive them.  Appropriates funds. 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
