HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1840
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO STATE-OWNED BANK.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the Bank of North Dakota is the only state-owned and operated financial institution in the United States.  Under North Dakota law, the bank is set up as the State of North Dakota doing business as the Bank of North Dakota.  All state funds, as well as funds administered by state and county agencies, are deposited with the Bank of North Dakota, thus creating a large deposit base.     In addition to paying competitive interest rates to the state treasurer, the Bank of North Dakota also invests its moneys in loan programs to spur economic development within the State.  The Bank of North Dakota also regularly turns over a portion of its profits to the state general fund.  Over the past decade, the bank has turned over approximately one-third of $1,000,000,000 to the state general fund, and despite the recent financial crisis, the bank earned record profits in 2008, with net earnings of approximately $57,000,000.
     Rather than competing with private banks, the Bank of North Dakota has created partnerships with over one hundred other North Dakota financial institutions to assist them in meeting the needs of the citizens of North Dakota.
     The legislature further finds that a state-owned bank would promote agriculture, education, community development, economic development, housing, and industry in the State by building a resource to help stabilize and grow the State's economy; use the resources of the people of the State within the State; support the common good and public benefit of the State; and leverage the State's financial capital and resources.  A state-owned bank may work in partnership with financial institutions, community-based organizations, economic development groups, guaranty agencies, and other stakeholder groups to better the State's economy.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a task force to study the feasibility of establishing a state-owned bank in Hawaii.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established a task force to study the feasibility of establishing a state-owned bank.  The task force shall consist of the following members:
(1)    One member appointed by the governor who shall have experience in banking and financial management;
(2)    One member of the senate, appointed by the president of the senate;
(3)    One member of the house of representatives, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
(4)    The director of finance or the director's designee;
(5)    The director of labor and industrial relations or the director's designee;
(6)    The attorney general or the attorney general's designee;
(7)    The commissioner of financial institutions of the department of commerce and consumer affairs, division of financial institutions, or the commissioner's designee;
(8)    A member from the Hawaii state association of counties;
(9)    A member from an organization representing banking and financial institutions; and
(10)   A member from a trade association representing credit unions;
provided that the members in paragraphs (8), (9), and (10) shall be appointed jointly by the president of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives.
     (b)  The commissioner of financial institutions of the department of commerce and consumer affairs, division of financial institutions, shall serve as the chairperson of the task force.
     (c)  The members of the task force shall not receive compensation for their services.
     (d)  The task force shall review and evaluate the feasibility of creating a state-owned bank.  Among other things, the task force shall review and evaluate the following:
(1)    The bank of North Dakota, its enabling statutes, its governing structure, and its programs;
(2)    The effectiveness and usefulness of an existing state bank, specifically the economic impact of having a state-owned bank;
(3)    Any impacts a state-owned bank will have on existing banks and financial institutions in the State;
(4)    The long-term broad economic impact and long-term job creation and state revenue impacts of having a state-owned bank;
(5)    The capital requirements of a state-owned bank;
(6)    Initial capitalization options for a state-owned bank;
(7)    The cash management and banking needs of the State;
(8)    An estimation of the short-term operating costs and projected revenues of a state-owned bank; and
(9)    The laws, statutes, rules, and regulations applicable to establishing a state-owned bank.
     (e)  The task force shall submit a report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the 2013 regular session.  
     SECTION 4.  The task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 5.  The legislative reference bureau shall provide the research and organizational support services necessary to assist the task force in achieving its purposes as required under this Act.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Financial Institutions; State-owned Bank; Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes a task force to review, investigate, and study the feasibility and cost of establishing a state-owned bank.  Requires a report to the Legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
