HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1887
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii is in need of more affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households to help in the recruitment and retention of essential workers.
     Most essential workers, such as teachers, police officers, hotel workers, firefighters, and other emergency responders would be considered moderate-income individuals.
     According to the 2011 Hawaii Housing Planning Study prepared for the Hawaii housing finance and development corporation, as many as fifty thousand new housing units would have to be built statewide during 2012-2016 to meet new demand generated by changing demographic and economic conditions.
     The legislature finds that households and individuals with moderate incomes have been priced out of Hawaii's housing market and are sometimes forced to move out of Hawaii to improve their lifestyle and own their own homes.  The median value of owner-occupied housing units statewide during 2005-2009 was $521,500, according to the United States Census Bureau.  The median household income for the State was $58,700, according to the 2011 housing demand survey in the 2011 Hawaii Housing Planning Study.
     Most importantly, the State and counties have experienced difficulty in recruiting and retaining essential workers, particularly when other states actively recruit in Hawaii.
     In addition to the cost of housing and the loss of essential workers to other states, some rural areas of the State have difficulty recruiting and retaining essential workers because of the remote location and difficult commute.
     Providing affordable housing to Hawaii's essential workers would solve several problems, including improving retention of these workers.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii housing finance and development corporation, in collaboration with the department of business, economic development, and tourism, shall conduct a study on affordable housing for essential workers.
     The study shall include, but not be limited to:
     (1)  The possibility of providing affordable housing for essential workers;
     (2)  Creating a mortgage loan assistance or loan forgiveness program for essential workers;
     (3)  Providing incentives specifically for essential workers willing to work in a rural area experiencing shortages of those workers; and
     (4)  Providing relocation costs.
     The Hawaii housing finance and development corporation, in collaboration with the department of business, economic development, and tourism, shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Affordable Housing Study; Essential Workers; Hawaii Housing Finance and Development Corporation; Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism
 
Description:
Requires a study on affordable housing for essential workers.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
