HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1888
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AIR CARRIER FEES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that fees imposed on passengers in recent years by air carriers for checked baggage have had a significant impact on both travelers and related government agencies.  With air carriers charging from $17 to $125 for each checked bag, financially burdened travelers are now electing to use carry-on luggage instead, which has led to several problems. 
     First, the legislature finds that this compromises the comfort and safety of passengers, particularly elderly and disabled travelers, by forcing them to carry more and heavier carry-on bags around airports and onto flights, and by crowding already tight cabin space.  Moreover, the increase in the amount of carry-on bags has placed an additional burden on already busy airport staff, facilities, and security checkpoints.  As a result, the legislature finds that on the national level the Transportation Security Administration has been forced to accommodate this increase at an estimated cost of $260,000,000 in tax dollars.  Finally, the legislature finds that the increased stress on security personnel, checkpoints, and funds compromises national security by diverting attention and funds from other vital security programs.
     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to mandate that Hawaii air carriers allow each passenger to check on one bag up to fifty pounds in weight free of charge.
     SECTION 2.  Section 261E-12, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  In the transportation of passengers, every Hawaii air carrier shall:
     (1)  Provide safe and adequate service, equipment, and facilities for the transportation of the passengers; and
     (2)  Establish, observe, and enforce just and reasonable:
         (A)  Rates, fares, and charges; provided that each passenger who has purchased a ticket for transportation on any Hawaii air carrier covered by this chapter shall be permitted to check on one bag that does not exceed fifty pounds in weight without charge;
         (B)  Regulations and practices relating to rates, fares, and charges; and
         (C)  Regulations and practices relating to:
              (i)  The issuance, form, and substance of tickets;
             (ii)  The carrying of personal, sample, and excess baggage;
            (iii)  The facilities for transportation; and
             (iv)  All other matters relating to or connected with the transportation of passengers as determined by the commission."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on September 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii Air Carrier; Baggage; Fees
 
Description:
Mandates that any passenger who has purchased a ticket for transportation on any Hawaii air carrier covered by chapter 261E shall be permitted to check on one bag that does not exceed fifty pounds in weight without charge.  Effective September 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
