HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1873
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PAHALA PUBLIC LIBRARY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Pahala public library shall be transferred from the jurisdiction of the Hawaii state public library system under the board of education to the jurisdiction of the department of education and shall be operated as a school library for the benefit of Kau high school.
     SECTION 2.  All rights, powers, functions, and duties of Pahala public library are transferred to the department of education.
     All officers and employees whose functions are transferred by this Act shall be transferred with their functions and shall continue to perform their regular duties upon their transfer, subject to the state personnel laws and this Act.
     No officer or employee of the State having tenure shall suffer any loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefit or privilege as a consequence of this Act, and such officer or employee may be transferred or appointed to a civil service position without the necessity of examination; provided that the officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed; and provided that subsequent changes in status may be made pursuant to applicable civil service and compensation laws.
     An officer or employee of the State who does not have tenure and who may be transferred or appointed to a civil service position as a consequence of this Act shall become a civil service employee without the loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefits or privileges and without the necessity of examination; provided that such officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed.
     If an office or position held by an officer or employee having tenure is abolished, the officer or employee shall not thereby be separated from public employment, but shall remain in the employment of the State with the same pay and classification and shall be transferred to some other office or position for which the officer or employee is eligible under the personnel laws of the State as determined by the head of the department or the governor.
     SECTION 3.  All appropriations, records, equipment, machines, files, supplies, contracts, books, papers, documents, maps, and other personal property heretofore made, used, acquired, or held by the Hawaii state public library system under the board of education relating to the functions transferred to the department of education shall be transferred with the functions to which they relate.
     SECTION 4.  All rules, policies, procedures, guidelines, and other material adopted or developed by the agencies, divisions, or offices transferred or placed for administrative purposes under this Act, shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the department of education pursuant to chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 5.  All deeds, leases, contracts, loans, agreements, permits, or other documents executed or entered into by or on behalf of the agencies, division, or offices transferred or placed for administrative purposes with the department of education by this Act, shall remain in full force and effect.
     SECTION 6.  The provisions of this Act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes.
     SECTION 7.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for personnel costs to ensure that Pahala public library maintains the operating hours of a school library.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 8.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Pahala Public Library
 
Description:
Transfers the administration of Pahala Public Library from the Public Library System to the Department of Education.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
