HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
185
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE COMMISSION ON THE YEAR 2050.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  During the 1970s, the legislature created a commission on the year 2000 to assess Hawaii's future.  Governor Burns stated that "[i]t is the thinking of many of us that a serious effort should be made to assess Hawaii's future economic, political, cultural, social systems and to identify the objectives that are desired and the action programs necessary to reach those objectives".
     The purpose of the commission on the year 2000 was:
     (1)  To study, and promote a general awareness of, the impact of technology and social change on Hawaii;
     (2)  To assess the future of Hawaii and identify desired state economic, political, cultural, social, and environmental goals;
     (3)  To recommend legislative and administrative actions to achieve these goals;
     (4)  To assist and coordinate activities of groups concerned with the Hawaii's future; and
     (5)  To report to the legislature recommendations as to the continuing responsibility and role that the State should assume in preparing for Hawaii's future and as to organization and administrative arrangements that should be provided for in law and otherwise.
     The commission held conferences and workshops, sponsored speakers, and wrote reports on futurist activities.  It is the purpose of this Act to carry this assessment of Hawaii's future into the twenty-first century by creating a commission on the year 2050 for the same purposes that the commission on the year 2000 was created.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
COMMISSION ON THE YEAR 2050
     §   -1  Commission established.  There is established within the department of business, economic development, and tourism for administrative purposes a commission on the year 2050 composed of nine members to be appointed and removed by the governor pursuant to section 26-34.  The governor shall appoint the chairperson of the commission from among its members.  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for travel and other necessary expenses.  The commission, with the consent of the governor and not subject to chapters 76 and 89, may appoint a program director and any other staff that may be necessary for the purposes of this chapter.  The department of business, economic development, and tourism and the University of Hawaii shall render any assistance and research services that the commission may require.
     §   -2  Duties.  The commission shall:
     (1)  Study the effects and changes produced by scientific and technological achievements and social changes with respect to the economic, political, cultural, and social systems and the environment of the State of Hawaii and the world;
     (2)  Assess the future of Hawaii, including identification of the economic, political, cultural, social, and environmental goals of the State;
     (3)  Devise and recommend legislative and administrative action for the accomplishment of the State's economic, political, cultural, social, and environmental goals;
     (4)  Assist and coordinate the plans, programs, and activities of individuals, associations, corporations, and agencies, whether public or private, concerned with the future of Hawaii;
     (5)  Stimulate and promote an awareness of scientific, technological, and social system changes and their effects on Hawaii's economic, political, cultural, and social systems and environment;
     (6)  Through its chairperson, administer funds allocated to the commission and accept, disburse, and allocate funds that may become available from other governmental and private sources; provided that all such funds shall be disbursed or allocated in compliance with any specific designation stated by the donor.  In the absence of any designation, those funds shall be disbursed or allocated for the promotion and furtherance of the purpose of this chapter; and
     (7)  Submit an annual report with recommendations to the governor and legislature prior to January 1 of each year.  The second annual report shall include recommendations regarding the continuing responsibility and role that the State should assume in preparing for Hawaii's future and organization and administrative arrangements that are required in law and otherwise."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to carry out the purpose of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of business, economic development, and tourism for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Commission on the year 2050
 
Description:
Creates a commission on the year 2050 within the department of business, economic development, and tourism to study the impact of technology and social change on Hawaii in the future.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
