HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1940
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR AGRICULTURE INSPECTORS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that support for the biosecurity system under the department of agriculture is important, as it recognizes the impact of invasive species to Hawaii’s agriculture, environment, natural resources, public health, and economy.  The effectiveness of the biosecurity program is directly related to the number of inspectors performing inspections at the ports, and the amount of resources appropriated to implement the various layers of protection within the biosecurity system.
     The legislature and Hawaii’s congressional delegation also find that the Kahului airport has the facilities and manpower for that port and the corresponding volume of air passengers, baggage, and cargo.  However, Honolulu international airport, which handles the majority of passengers, baggage, and cargo arriving into Hawaii, does not have the inspection facilities or the necessary number of inspectors required to perform effective inspections.  The cargo loads entering the State through the Honolulu international airport is approximately thirty times that of Kahului airport.  In testimony submitted to Senator Daniel Akaka, it was stated that the manpower based at the Kahului airport would equate to approximately three hundred inspectors based at Honolulu international airport.
Senator Akaka highlighted this issue at his field hearing for the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Subcommittee on Oversight of Government Management, the Federal Workforce, and the District of Columbia, on October 27, 2011.  As most cargo and "high risk" cargo are cleared and inspected at Honolulu harbor and Honolulu international airport, the emphasis on the biosecurity system must be at Honolulu harbor and Honolulu international airport.       Furthermore, the department of transportation is moving forward with the airport and harbor modernization plans, which will increase the capacity of the harbors and airports.  Correspondingly, these programs increase the risk and potential impacts to the State, as these are the two major pathways for invasive species into Hawaii.  In addition, increased movement of goods into Hawaii from international origination points will pose the greatest risk.  These incoming pests will require additional rapid response and quarantine measures by the plant quarantine inspectors due to the inability of the federal inspection agencies to protect Hawaii from incoming "actionable" and "non-actionable" pests through the ports.
     As the legislature supports the department of transportation's modernization programs, it realizes that the department of transportation needs assistance in funding inspection at the ports.  In addition, the additional quarantine and rapid response programs may be on- or off-port.  Therefore, the staffing levels for the department of agriculture plant quarantine inspector and support staff need to be funded at a level to meet existing requirements prior to the expansion of the port system.
     The current staff of agricultural inspectors is approximately fifty per cent of the work force necessary to effectively inspect existing incoming cargo.  The legislature is concerned that the State is not being protected, especially in light of the anticipated increases of incoming cargo, and that the focus should be on protecting the State rather than a port or a county.  Public health, safety and welfare, agriculture, the environment, and our economy are compromised by the lack of sufficient resources.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the agricultural development and food security special fund the sum of $      or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to fund     plant quarantine inspectors and      support staff.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  The department of agriculture shall submit a status update on agricultural inspection activities funded under this Act to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 regular session.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Department of Agriculture; Inspectors; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates funds from the agriculture development and food security special fund to fund plant quarantine inspectors and support staff.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
