HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1941
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR AGRICULTURAL INSPECTION FACILITIES AND RELATED INFRASTRUCTURE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Under section 150A-53, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the department of agriculture is authorized to establish biosecurity facilities to improve the inspection of commodities at the various ports of entry and in climate controlled facilities to maintain the quality of perishable commodities.  In addition, under Act 202, Session Laws of Hawaii 2011, the department of agriculture and the department of transportation are authorized to plan, design, and construct biosecurity, inspection, consolidation, and deconsolidation facilities to enhance the movement of imported and exported marine cargo at commercial harbors.  Act 202 also states that the department of transportation shall coordinate with the department of agriculture on biosecurity, inspection, and cargo support facilities at the airports.
     The department of transportation has provided a location at Kawaihae harbor for construction of a biosecurity and inspection facility, and as a part of the department of transportation's short-term development plan for Kawaihae harbor.  Funding is needed to enable the departments to work toward an efficient and cost-effective plan for the design and construction of the short-term facility at Kawaihae harbor.
     The department of transportation has also provided locations for biosecurity facilities at Kona international airport at Keahole and at Honolulu international airport.  However, the department of agriculture requires funding to plan, design, and construct the biosecurity facilities at Kona international airport at Keahole and Honolulu international airport.  The facility at Honolulu international airport is a priority as ninety per cent or more of the air cargo that enters the State is transported through that airport.  Air cargo is the highest risk pathway, as it transports the most viable invasive species into the State, as well as the majority of smuggled restricted or prohibited plants and animals.
Facilities are also required to process, consolidate, deconsolidate, and distribute Hawaii–grown high risk commodities as part of the department of agriculture's import replacement program.  The Hawaii-grown high risk commodities that are targeted by the facilities are leafy green vegetables such as Myrtaceae.   Other high risk imports such as peppers and strawberries, which have the potential to be grown in Hawaii should be addressed as well.
     Improvements to an existing facility, the Kamuela Vacuum Cooling Plant, will enable the continued production and consolidation of agricultural commodities from the Waimea region of the island of Hawaii.  The Kamuela Vacuum Cooling plant is decades old and the cooling equipment requires replacement.  The Waimea area is the major producer of Hawaii-grown leafy green vegetables and peppers.
     The second facility is a proposed deconsolidation facility and marketplace at Honolulu harbor.  The Honolulu harbor facility is needed to provide a marketplace for local agriculture products, including products from neighbor islands, and to minimize the impact of any changes to Young Brothers' handling and transportation of less-than-container-load cargo.     The purpose of this Act is to provide funding for:
     (1)  The biosecurity facilities at Kawaihae harbor, Honolulu international airport and Kona international airport;
     (2)  The Kamuela Vacuum Cooling Plant; and
     (3)  The Honolulu harbor facility buy Hawaii-grown marketplace and agency facilities.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the agricultural development and food security special fund the sum of $       or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to finance the following projects:
     A.   Honolulu international airport, Oahu
          Plans, design, and construction of a
          biosecurity facility.
          Total funding                            $10,000,000
     B.   Kona international airport at Keahole, Hawaii
          Plans, design, and construction of a
          biosecurity facility.
          Total funding                              $2,500,000
     C.   Kawaihae harbor, Hawaii
          Plans, design, and construction of a
          biosecurity facility.
          Total funding                              $2,500,000
     D.   Honolulu harbor, Oahu
          Plans, design, and construction of a
          deconsolidation facility and marketplace.
          Total funding                              $1,000,000      E.   Kamuela Vacuum Cooling Plant, Hawaii
          Replacement chambers
          Total funding                            $          
     SECTION 3.  The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  The department of agriculture and the department of transportation shall submit a report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 regular session on the status of the projects funded by the appropriation contained in this Act.  The report shall also contain recommendations for further legislation, if any, necessary to achieve the purpose of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agriculture; Biosecurity; Appropriation
 
Description:
Makes an appropriation to establish agricultural inspection biosecurity facilities and related infrastructure at the Honolulu International Airport, Kona International Airport, Kawaihae Harbor, Kamuela Vacuum Cooling Plant, and Honolulu Harbor.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
