HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1973
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAIIAN LANGUAGE IMMERSION PROGRAMS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that article X, section 4 of the state constitution provides, in relevant part, that:
     "The State shall promote the study of Hawaiian culture, history and language.
     The State shall provide for a Hawaiian education program consisting of language, culture and history in the public schools."
     The purpose of this Act is to further the purposes of article X, section 4 of the state constitution, by requiring that ten per cent of the department of education's pro rata portion of the funds derived annually from the public land trust be expended to fund Hawaiian language immersion programs in this State.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§10-    Hawaiian language immersion program grant commission; established.  (a)  There is established a Hawaiian language immersion program grant commission within the office of Hawaiian affairs for administrative purposes to oversee the allocation of funds pursuant to section 302A-  .
     (b)  The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the governor.  Four of the members shall be selected as follows:
     (1)  One from a list of not less than three names submitted by the president of the senate;
     (2)  One from a list of not less than three names submitted by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (3)  One from a list of not less than three names submitted by the office of Hawaiian affairs; and
     (4)  One from a list of not less than three names submitted by the Hawaiian homes commission.
     (c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for expenses necessary in the performance of their duties.  The members of the commission shall be subject to section 26-34.  The commission shall select a chairperson from among its members.  The term of each member shall be four years, provided that of the five members initially appointed, two members shall hold office for two years, two members shall hold office for three years, and one member shall hold office for four years.
     (d)  The commission shall submit to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013, and every year thereafter, a report of its grants, activities, findings, and recommendations."
     SECTION 3.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows: 
     "§302A-    Hawaiian language immersion programs; funding.  In each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2012-2013, the department shall allocate a sum equal to ten per cent of all public land lease revenues realized by the State in the immediately preceding fiscal year for expenditure in the form of grants to fund Hawaiian language immersion programs in this State.  When calculating the sum to be allocated pursuant to this section, all revenues owed to the office of Hawaiian affairs pursuant to section 10-13.5 shall be excluded."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Land Trust Revenues; DOE; OHA; Hawaiian Language Immersion Programs
 
Description:
Requires that the DOE allocate an amount equal to 10% of revenues derived from the public land trust out of its annual budget to be used to fund Hawaiian language immersion programs.  Establishes a commission within OHA to oversee the allocation of moneys.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
