HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
1944
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE HAWAII ASSOCIATION OF CONSERVATION DISTRICTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The Hawaii association of conservation districts, through coordination, facilitation, and partnerships assists government agencies in identifying and implementing culturally-sensitive projects and practices to ensure the protection of Hawaii's environment.  The Hawaii association of conservation districts is comprised of sixteen districts representing every community on all major islands of Hawaii.  Chapter 180, Hawaii Revised Statutes, authorizes the soil and water conservation districts to operate as government subdivisions to educate the public and construct and maintain conservation projects and programs in Hawaii.  Each of the districts is governed by five volunteer directors and has some level of staffing.  The department of land and natural resources provides administration and maintains oversight authority of the soil and water conservation districts.
     The soil and water conservation districts have worked to improve Hawaii's environment and economy through major projects over the past fifty years.  While these projects do not occur in all districts every year, collaborative efforts with partners and government agencies have brought millions of dollars to Hawaii to improve farm practices, reduce erosion, improve ocean and drinking water quality, fight invasive species, improve public safety, protect property, conserve water, and strengthen the economy.
     The soil and water conservation districts also provide educational and community support for conservation awareness.  The districts participate in resource conservation and development projects and statewide high school programs.  The districts also introduce conservation principles in elementary schools.
     In addition, the soil and water conservation districts assist with reviewing each county's grading permits and conservation plans.  County grading permit reviews and conservation plans are critical to preserve the environment, stimulate the economy, and maintain individual livelihoods.  The demand and accompanying workload for this service has increased dramatically with population growth and land use changes.  The districts receive hundreds of requests for conservation plans and county grading permits reviews each year.  As a result, districts are currently struggling to keep pace with the demand.
     The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds to the Hawaii association of conservation districts to assist with its staffing and operating costs.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for staffing and operating costs of the Hawaii association of conservation districts.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of land and natural resources for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Appropriation; Hawaii Association of Conservation Districts
 
Description:
Appropriates funds for the Hawaii Association of Conservation Districts to assist with its staffing and operating costs.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
