HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2071
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TRAFFIC.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 291C-14, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§291C-14  Duty to give information and render aid; passing stationary vehicle, private citizen rendering aid.  (a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle or other property which is driven or attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address, and the registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving, and shall upon request and if available exhibit the driver's license or permit to drive to any person injured in the accident or to the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle or other property damaged in the accident and shall give such information and upon request exhibit such license or permit to any police officer at the scene of the accident or who is investigating the accident and shall render to any person injured in the accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of the person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary, or if such carrying is requested by the injured person; provided that if the vehicle involved in the accident is a bicycle, the driver of the bicycle need not exhibit a license or permit to drive.
     (b)  In the event that none of the persons specified is in condition to receive the information to which they otherwise would be entitled under subsection (a), and no police officer is present, the driver of any vehicle involved in the accident after fulfilling all other requirements of section 291C-12, 291C-12.5, or 291C-12.6, and subsection (a) of this section, insofar as possible on the driver's part to be performed, shall forthwith report the accident to the nearest police officer and submit thereto the information specified in subsection (a).
     (c)  On approaching a stationary vehicle that appears to be disabled where a person is present, a driver who is passing the stationary vehicle, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or person of authority, shall:
     (1)  Vacate the lane closest to the stationary vehicle when driving on a highway with two or more lanes traveling in the direction of the stationary vehicle and continue traveling in that lane until safely clear of the stationary vehicle; provided that before reaching the stationary vehicle the driver may change lanes safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic; or
     (2)  Slow to a speed not to exceed:
         (A)  Twenty miles per hour less than the posted speed limit when the posted speed limit is twenty-five miles per hour or more; provided that before reaching the stationary vehicle the driver may reduce the speed of the vehicle safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic; or
         (B)  Five miles per hour when the posted speed limit is less than twenty-five miles per hour; provided that before reaching the stationary vehicle the driver may reduce the speed of the vehicle safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
     Any person who violates this subsection shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.
     [(e)] (d)  For any violation under [this section,] subsection (a) or (b), a surcharge of up to $100 may be imposed, in addition to other penalties, which shall be deposited into the trauma system special fund."
     SECTION 2.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Stationary Vehicle; Passing; Vacate Lane; Reduce Speed; Render Aid
 
Description:
Requires motorists when passing a stationary vehicle whose passengers are rendering aid at a traffic accident on a highway to vacate the lane closest to the stationary vehicle or reduce driving speed until safely clear of the stationary vehicle.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
