HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2056
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that earning a high school diploma is an essential step for young people to become productive members of Hawaii's communities.  Children who drop out of school or are expelled are unlikely to return to school on their own, so it is essential that these at-risk youth are presented with opportunities that will help them finish their high school education.
     The legislature further finds that the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy is a good option for young people to complete their high school career.  The Academy's program is comprised of a twenty-two week residential phase, followed by a year-long mentoring relationship with a specially trained member from each youth's community.  The program's goal is to produce graduates that have the values, life skills, education, and self-discipline necessary to succeed as productive citizens.
     The purpose of this Act is to assist the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy in reaching out to at-risk youth by requiring the department of education to provide the Academy with the names, addresses, and dates of attendance of students who have dropped out of high school.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Provision of student information to Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy.  (a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), on or before January 15 and July 15 of each year, the department shall submit to the director of the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy a report containing the name, last known address, and dates of attendance of any student who:
     (1)  Is at least sixteen years of age but less than eighteen years of age;
     (2)  Was enrolled but is no longer enrolled in a school in the State;
     (3)  Has not provided school transfer or graduation information to the school that the student most recently attended; and
     (4)  Has not received a high school diploma or general educational development certificate.
     (b)  Prior to submitting a student's information to the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy pursuant to subsection (a), the department shall provide written notice of the disclosure to the parent or guardian of the student if the student is less than eighteen years of age; provided that the parent or guardian, if the student is less than eighteen years of age, shall have not less than thirty days to object to the disclosure.
     (c)  The report submitted by the department pursuant to subsection (a) shall not include the information of any student who is:
     (1)  Receiving medical care or treatment that prohibits school attendance;
     (2)  Enrolled in a foreign exchange program;
     (3)  Enrolled in an early admissions college program;
     (4)  Participating in a job corps program, an adult basic education program, or an accredited apprenticeship program; or
     (5)  Excused from school for a reason determined to be acceptable by the department.
     (d)  The director of the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy shall certify in writing to the department that the information provided pursuant to this section will not be disclosed to any other party except as necessary to recruit and retain students."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
DOE; Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy
 
Description:
Requires the DOE to provide the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy with the names, addresses, and dates of attendance of students who have dropped out of high school.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
