HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2063
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PUBLIC SAFETY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

PART I.
STRENGTHENING FAMILIES OF INCARCERATED PERSONS
     SECTION 1.  The department of public safety is in the process of developing a system to identify children of incarcerated parents, develop programs and support services for those children, provide appropriate support for incarcerated parents, and develop programs to strengthen the well-being of those families.  The legislature finds that it is crucial to the rehabilitation process that the families of incarcerated persons have sufficient security and are in a comfortable state.  Strong families and family ties, particularly with regard to children of incarcerated persons, provide a level of hope and normalcy in life to the inmate.
     The purpose of this part is to appropriate funds for programs to strengthen the well-being of families of incarcerated persons and help children of incarcerated persons.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $100,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for programs to strengthen the well-being of families of incarcerated persons.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of public safety for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $50,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for programs to help children of incarcerated persons.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of public safety for the purposes of this part.
PART II.
RESTORATIVE CIRCLES
     SECTION 4.  The legislature finds that restorative circles are based on restorative justice, which is an approach to justice that focuses on the needs of victims, offenders, and the community.  Victims take an active role in the process, and offenders are encouraged to take responsibility for their actions by making an apology to the victims and expressing remorse for the offender's misdeeds.  The process involves the collaboration of victim and offender in a voluntary, mutual, and supportive verbal interaction to heal the wounds.  In addition, it provides help for the offender in order to avoid future offenses.  Restorative circles implement the theory of justice that crime is a wrongdoing against the victim and the community, rather than solely the state.
     The purpose of this part if to appropriate funds for the restorative circles program.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $60,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the restorative circles program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of public safety for the purposes of this part.
PART III.
GOING HOME PROGRAM FOR EX-OFFENDERS IN HAWAII COUNTY
     SECTION 6.  The legislature finds that the Hawaii county workforce investment board provides a comprehensive prison-to-community reentry program for incarcerated persons on the island of Hawaii.  The reentry program, known as "going home", is part of Hawaii county's labor force pool expansion.  The Hawaii Island Workforce and Economic Development Ohana, Inc., is the coordinating entity for the going home program, and its mission is to promote the development of a highly competent and productive workforce by coordinating the efforts of educational institutions, labor, business, economic development organizations, and the entire community in order to sustain a vibrant Big Island economy and lifestyle.
     The purpose of this part is to appropriate funds as a grant-in-aid for funding the going home program.
     SECTION 7.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $100,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant-in-aid to Hawaii county to provide funding for the "going home" program provided through the Hawaii county workforce investment board.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the county of Hawaii for the purposes of this part.
PART IV.
PROGRAM FOR EX-OFFENDERS ON MAUI
     SECTION 8.  The legislature finds that the "being empowered and safe together" program administered by Maui Economic Opportunity, Inc., in collaboration with the department of public safety, serves individuals who are preparing to return to the community from Maui community correctional center.  The program provides comprehensive transitional assistance to inmates and ex-inmates, with the goals of reducing recidivism and increasing public safety.  The typical individual served has been convicted of serious and violent offenses and incarcerated for over a year.
     The purpose of this part is to appropriate funds as a grant-in-aid to fund the "being empowered and safe together" program and other programs of Maui Economic Opportunity, Inc.
     SECTION 9.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $100,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant-in-aid to Hawaii county to provide funding for the "being empowered and safe together" program or other programs administered by Maui Economic Opportunity, Inc., for inmates and ex-inmates.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the county of Hawaii for the purposes of this part.
PART V.
BUILDING JOB SKILLS
     SECTION 10.  The legislature finds that the department of public safety provides programs to teach inmates transferable job skills and a positive work ethic to help prepare them for post-release, reentry, and employment in the community.  The goal of these programs, usually provided through the correctional industries division, is to return an economically self-sufficient individual to the community who will be able to immediately join the workforce and become a productive, law abiding member of society.
     The purpose of this part is to appropriate funds for building job skills of inmates.
     SECTION 11.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $90,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for building job skills of inmates, particularly those who are soon to be paroled.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of public safety for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 12.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Safety; Appropriations
 
Description:
Makes appropriations for various rehabilitation, reentry, and job skill programs of the department of public safety.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
