HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2093
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature established the Hawaii State Planning Act, codified in chapter 226, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to, among other things, "identify the goals, objectives, policies, and priorities for the State" and "provide a basis for determining priorities and allocating limited resources, such as public funds, services, human resources, land, energy, water, and other resources." 
     The legislature finds that the Hawaii State Planning Act asserts that it shall be the policy of the State to "[p]romote economically competitive activities that increase Hawaii's agricultural self-sufficiency" and "[i]ncrease the attractiveness and opportunities for an agricultural education and livelihood."  The legislature further finds that the Act ensures and supports quality education that is accessible, and ensures environmentally healthful and sanitary conditions for all Hawaii residents.
     The legislature further finds that supporting Hawaii's agriculture education and school farms is in line with these policy guidelines.  In order for Hawaii to continue toward agricultural sustainability, it is necessary to educate future farmers and ensure the place of local agricultural products in Hawaii's markets. 
     An important aspect of any agricultural education is that of food safety.  The United States Department of Agriculture regularly updates food safety standards and it is imperative to include these standards, along with other requirements imposed upon farms in the State, in the agricultural curriculum. 
     In addition, there is a place for school farms in the growing farm to school movement.  Students of agriculture can build their skills and knowledge while at the same time providing fresh, local produce to Hawaii's school cafeterias.  This can only be the case, however, if the public can be certain that food grown on a school farm is safe for consumption.
     The purposes of this Act, therefore, are to support agricultural education and school farms by requiring the University of Hawaii to:
     (1)  Establish a center for agricultural leadership that will be primarily responsible for developing the next generation of agricultural leaders and will conduct activities, including pilot projects and demonstration projects to improve agricultural education in the State; and
     (2)  Establish a school farm pilot project within the center for agricultural leadership to determine the steps necessary for school farms to achieve food safety certification by the department of agriculture.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 304A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new subpart to part IV to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"   .  CENTER FOR AGRICULTURAL LEADERSHIP
     §304A-    Center for agricultural leadership; establishment.  (a)  There is established within the University of Hawaii a center for agricultural leadership to:
     (1)  Encourage the development of agricultural education within the State;
     (2)  Provide opportunities for agriculture teacher education; and
     (3)  Make a positive difference in the lives of students and develop their potential for premier leadership, personal growth, and career success through agricultural education.
     (b)  The center for agricultural leadership shall collaborate with the department of education and other relevant organizations and agencies to fulfill its purpose.
     §304A-    Director; center for agricultural leadership.  (a)  The center for agricultural leadership shall be headed by a director who shall:
     (1)  Be responsible for the mission, direction, and goals of the center;
     (2)  Develop partnerships with agricultural organizations and stakeholders to further the center's mission and objectives;
     (3)  Maintain and support the Future Farmers of America program or successor organization within the State; and
     (4)  Recommend projects and programs to promote the expansion and development of the agricultural industry in Hawaii.
     (b)  The director of the center for agricultural leadership shall be appointed by the board of regents upon recommendation by the president.  The director may hire staff as necessary to carry out the work of the center."
     SECTION 3.  (a)  The University of Hawaii shall establish a two-year pilot project within the center for agricultural leadership to determine the steps necessary for farms operated through school programs to achieve food safety certification by the department of agriculture.  The pilot project shall be conducted at one high school in each county.  In order to be chosen for this pilot project, a high school must currently maintain a school farm that has a high likelihood of meeting current food safety certification requirements.
     (b)  The pilot project established under subsection (a) shall, at minimum:
     (1)  Assess the current operations of the school farm;
     (2)  Determine the requirements of department of agriculture food safety certification;
     (3)  Interface with the department of agriculture to identify any potential barriers to school farm food safety certification and generate remedies to such barriers; and
     (4)  Incorporate the process of food safety certification into any agriculture-related curriculum associated with the school farm.
     (c)  The University of Hawaii shall submit a progress report on the implementation of the school farm pilot project, including any difficulties encountered, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013, and a final report, including any recommendations for legislation, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2014.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to implement the purposes of this Act.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the University of Hawaii for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agricultural Education; Pilot Project; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the University of Hawaii to establish a Center for Agricultural Leadership.  Requires the University of Hawaii to establish a two-year pilot project at one high school campus in each county to determine the steps necessary for a school farm to be food safety certified by the Department of Agriculture.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
