HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2008
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CHARTER SCHOOLS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the charter school governance, accountability, and authority task force ("task force") was established pursuant to section 7 of Act 130, Session Laws of Hawaii 2011, in response to questions and concerns raised by policy makers and advocates alike about the integrity of Hawaii's charter school governance structure and the overall strength of Hawaii's laws in establishing clear lines of authority that ensured accountability of the charter school system.
     Specifically, the goal of the task force was to provide clarity to the relationships, responsibilities, and lines of accountability and authority among stakeholders of Hawaii's charter school system, including the board of education, department of education, charter school administrative office, charter school review panel, and local school boards. 
     In conducting its work, the task force looked at various sections of the charter school model law put forth by the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools and used the model law as a guide in compiling its recommendations to the legislature.
     The task force was also fortunate to have the assistance and input of the National Association of Charter School Authorizers and the National Governors Association.
     The task force concluded its work and issued its report and recommendations to the legislature, which are included in S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the board of education to contract for an implementation and transition coordinator to assist in creating a comprehensive transition framework to implement the recommendations of the task force, included in S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The board of education, in consultation with national organizations such as the National Governors Association, National Association of Charter School Authorizers, and National Alliance for Public Charter Schools, shall develop a scope of work to contract for an implementation and transition coordinator to assist with:
     (1)  Implementation of the recommendations of the charter school governance, accountability, and authority task force pursuant to Act 130, Session Laws of Hawaii 2011; and
     (2)  The transition from the current charter school system under chapter 302B, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to the charter school system proposed in S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012.
     (b)  At a minimum, the board shall contract for an implementation and transition coordinator that possesses the following:
     (1)  Knowledge of best practices in educational governance and accountability, with a strong emphasis on charter schools;
     (2)  Extensive experience in public policy and administration, specifically working with state policy makers and community stakeholders; and
     (3)  Demonstrated strong written and oral communication skills.
     (c)  The scope of work developed pursuant to subsection (a) shall, at a minimum, require the implementation and transition coordinator to:
     (1)  Develop a comprehensive plan for the implementation of the recommendations of the charter school governance, accountability, and authority task force as set forth in S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012, including the development of a communications plan, a plan for engaging key charter school stakeholders, and development of a strategy for the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation efforts by the board of education;
     (2)  Draft policies and procedures, including administrative rules, necessary for the implementation of S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012;
     (3)  Assist in developing position descriptions for and recruitment of the state public charter school commission staff as detailed in the charter school governance, accountability, and authority task force report to the legislature pursuant to Act 130, Session Laws of Hawaii 2011;
     (4)  Determine a plan and develop procedures for the redistribution of the duties of the charter school administrative office to other charter school stakeholders upon the repeal of the charter school administrative office pursuant to S.B. No.     , Regular Session of 2012;
     (5)  Develop a funding plan to address the transition of current charter school administrative office staff to the state public charter school commission established pursuant to S.B. No.     , Regular Session of 2012;
     (6)  Assist the board of education with the recruitment and selection of members to the state public charter school commission established pursuant to S.B. No.     , Regular Session of 2012;
     (7)  Prepare communications and coordinate collaboration between charter schools, governing boards, charter school authorizers, board of education, department of education, other state departments, and the legislature in carrying out the scope of work; and
     (8)  Assist the department of education in taking an inventory of all full time employee positions within the department that work with charter schools and making a recommendation as to which positions may be repurposed or redirected based upon the statutory changes required by S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012.
     (c)  The board of education shall be responsible for awarding and overseeing the contract.
     (d)  The term of the contract shall be for one year; provided that the board of education and the implementation and transition coordinator may enter into supplemental contracts as the board of education may deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
     (e)  Chapter 103D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall not apply to the contracting of the implementation and transition coordinator pursuant to this Act.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the board of education to contract for an implementation and transition coordinator.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012, only if S.B. No.     in any form passed by the legislature, Regular Session of 2012, becomes an Act.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Charter Schools; Board of Education; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the Board of Education to contract for an implementation and transition coordinator to assist with the implementation of S.B. No.      , Regular Session of 2012.  Makes an appropriation. 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
