HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2198
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO KUPUNA CARE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  According to the executive office on aging, the elderly population in Hawaii is one of the fastest growing segments of the population in the country.  Between 1990 and 2000, the number of persons aged sixty and older increased by nineteen per cent, compared to a nationwide increase of nine per cent.  Studies conducted by the executive office on aging and the four county area agencies on aging have indicated that the elderly in Hawaii have a significant need for assistance in various areas and this need is outpacing the ability to provide assistance.  Significant issues that arise with elderly people include health status, changes in family structure (caregivers), social security stability for the future, fear of health care burdens (financial stability), and changes in public responsibility.  Case management and needs assessments of older adults are required to mold programs and services to meet the needs of the elderly community.  As Hawaii's culture and values revolve around family, most caregiving of the elderly in Hawaii is provided by family members, which poses financial hardships for these family members.  Financial stability and burden are the main issues for the elderly and their caregivers and families.  Long term care services are expensive and the high cost of services may lead to changes in living arrangements and family households, especially in Hawaii.
     The State's kupuna care program (kupuna care) was established in 1999 to address the needs of the aging population and the issues arising from those needs.  The program is home- and community-based, designed to address the increasing need for affordable long term care and the desire of the elderly to age in place.  The program provides funding for services to populations who are not eligible for medicaid, but cannot afford services or insurance on their own.  Therefore, the program has no financial eligibility criteria and services are free to clients, although consumers are asked to make voluntary donations to the service provider.  Kupuna care is an alternative to traditional long term care options, which are often more costly, and the program fills an important gap in assistance for the elderly in Hawaii.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the executive office on aging to establish a sliding fee schedule to generate additional revenue for the kupuna care program and to appropriate funds for the kupuna care program.
     SECTION 2.  The executive office on aging of the department of health shall establish a sliding fee schedule to generate additional revenue for kupuna care to expand upon the services it provides to elderly population in Hawaii.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the executive office on aging of the department of health to provide funding for the kupuna care program in addition to the $           executive office on aging base budget.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kupuna Caucus; Kupuna Care; Appropriation; Long Term Care Commission
 
Description:
Appropriates funds for the kupuna care program.  Requires executive office on aging to establish a sliding fee schedule for the kupuna care program.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
