HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2111
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE SELECTIVE SERVICE REGISTRATION AWARENESS AND COMPLIANCE ACT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature recognizes that sufficient armed strength must be achieved and maintained to insure the security of the United States.  In a free society, the obligations and privileges of serving in the armed forces and the reserve components should be shared in accordance with a system of selection that is fair and just, and consistent with maintaining an effective national economy.
     The legislature finds that to achieve these national security goals, the United States Congress has enacted the United States Military Selective Service Act (50 U.S.C. App. 451 et seq.), which requires all male citizens and males residing in the United States, except for lawfully admitted non-immigrants, to register with the Selective Service System upon reaching the age of eighteen.
     The legislature further finds that any person who is not in compliance with the Military Selective Service Act is ineligible for federal student financial assistance and employment within the executive branch of the federal government.
     The purpose of this Act is to require compliance with the Military Selective Service Act to be eligible for enrollment in a state-supported post-secondary institution, qualify for state financial assistance for post-secondary education, or be eligible for state or county employment or service.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER  
SELECTIVE SERVICE REGISTRATION AWARENESS AND COMPLIANCE ACT
     §   -1  Short title.  This chapter shall be known as the "Selective Service Registration Awareness and Compliance Act".
     §   -2  Definitions.  As used in this chapter:
     "Military Selective Service Act" means 50 United States Code App. 451 et seq.
     §   -3  Compliance; post-secondary education enrollment and financial assistance.  (a)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any person who is not in compliance with the Military Selective Service Act, shall not be:
(1)  Permitted to enroll in, or receive education from, a state-supported post-secondary institution, including a university, college, community college, professional school, research facility, education center, or institution within the University of Hawaii system; and
(2)  Eligible to receive a loan, grant, scholarship, or other financial assistance for post-secondary education that is provided by, supported by, or guaranteed by the State.
(b)  The University of Hawaii shall ensure that applicants
and enrollees under its jurisdiction comply with the Military
Selective Service Act for the purposes of this section.
     §   -4  Compliance; state and county employment and service.  (a)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no male United States citizen and every other male person residing in the United States between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six, who are not in compliance with the Military Selective Service Act, shall be eligible for employment by the State or any political subdivision of the State, or eligible for service for the State or any political subdivision of the State, including all offices, self-governing bodies, boards and commissions, departments, agencies, institutions, and instrumentalities.
     (b)  The State and respective counties shall ensure that employees under their jurisdiction comply with the Military Selective Service Act for the purposes of this section.
§   -5  Exceptions.  A person shall not be denied a right, privilege, or benefit under this chapter for noncompliance with the Military Selective Service Act if the person is:
(1)  Eighteen years of age or under, or over twenty-six years of age;
(2)  In the armed forces of the United States on active duty, other than in a reserve or National Guard unit or has already served in the armed forces or has a condition that would preclude acceptability for military service;
(3)  Neither a United States citizen nor a resident immigrant;
(4)  A permanent resident of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Island or the Northern Mariana Islands; or
(5)  Is excused from registration for some other reason provided by the Military Selective Service Act and that reason is included in a written statement.
§   -6  Severability.  If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Selective Service Registration Awareness and Compliance Act
 
Description:
Requires compliance with the Military Selective Service Act to be eligible for enrollment in a state-supported post-secondary institution, qualify for state financial assistance for post-secondary education, or be eligible for state or county employment or service.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
