HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2194
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO LONG TERM CARE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds the following:
     (1)  Americans are living longer today than in the past with multiple, chronic health conditions and greater rates of disability in old age;
     (2)  The aging of the population in Hawaii guarantees that there will be a greater need for long term care in the future than there is currently.  Between 2007 and 2030, the population aged eighty-five and older, which has the greatest need for long term care, will increase by almost two-thirds;
     (3)  Despite the fact that long term care is not covered by medicare or regular private health insurance, according to a recent 2011 survey of Association of American Retired Persons members in Hawaii, twenty-nine per cent of respondents said they expected medicare to pay for their long term care, if needed;
     (4)  Most people in Hawaii have limited knowledge on long term care issues, which can affect their motivation to spend time and resources establishing their future long term care plans; and
     (5)  A long term care education campaign will create awareness among the next generation of long term care recipients, those between the ages of forty-five and sixty-four, about the risks of not planning for long term care, available resources, and maximizing the length of independent living.
     (b)  The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds to the executive office on aging of the department of health to administer a public education and awareness campaign on long term care and obtain an evaluation of the campaign.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of health's executive office on aging shall conduct a long term care education and awareness campaign.
     (b)  The campaign shall:
     (1)  Inform the public on the likelihood of needing long term care at some point in life;
     (2)  Educate the public on the cost of long term care, including the limits of medicaid eligibility and the limits of medicaid benefits;
     (3)  Inform the public on the value and availability of current financing and delivery options to obtain long term care; and
     (4)  Provide the public with resources to navigate the complexities of planning for long term care and the agencies that provide these services.
     (c)  The director of the executive office on aging shall have the impact of the campaign independently evaluated for its effectiveness.
     (d)  The director of the executive office on aging shall submit the report of the evaluation's findings and recommendations, if any, to the legislature and the Hawaii long-term care commission, established pursuant to Act 224, Session Laws of Hawaii 2008, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 regular session.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the executive office on aging of the department of health to conduct an education and awareness campaign on long term care and an evaluation of the campaign.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kapuna Caucus; Long Term Care; Education; Appropriation; Long Term Care Commission
 
Description:
Requests the executive office on aging of the department of health to conduct an education and awareness campaign on long term care and have the campaign evaluated.  Appropriates funds for the long term care education and awareness campaign and an evaluation of the campaign.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
