HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2112
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO RE-OPENING THE KULANI CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The Kulani correctional facility closed on November 20, 2009, and the facility was transferred to the state department of defense.  The incarcerated population of approximately one hundred twenty at the Kulani correctional facility was transferred to the Halawa correctional facility, to the federal detention center in Honolulu, and to mainland prisons.  The Kulani correctional facility specialized in providing sex offender treatment, which the department of public safety describes as being one of the most successful programs in the country.
     The legislature finds that Hawaii's incarcerated persons who serve their incarceration sentence in Hawaii have more potential for rehabilitation when they can live in familiar surroundings and be close to relatives.  In addition, the sex offender treatment services that were provided at the Kulani correctional facility were among the finest in the country.  Consideration of the costs of incarceration on the mainland, rather than incarceration in Hawaii, is outweighed by the rehabilitation success of persons incarcerated in Hawaii.  Successful rehabilitation eventually results in lower recidivism and lower costs.
     The Kulani correctional facility has since been converted to a second site for the Hawaii National Guard Youth Challenge Academy.  The Youth Challenge Academy and other stakeholders have since located a site at the Keaukaha Military Reservation that may be a suitable replacement site.  However, the new proposed site does not have an appropriate facility to house cadets.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of public safety to make plans to reopen the Kulani correctional facility and to appropriate funds for plans and design of new barracks for the Youth Challenge Academy at the Keaukaha Military Reservation.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  No later than December 31, 2012, the department of public safety shall develop a plan to reopen the Kulani correctional facility, including an implementation process to transfer back incarcerated persons to and house new inmates at the Kulani correctional facility.
     (b)  The emphasis of the reopened Kulani correctional facility shall be on providing sex offender treatment rehabilitation services.
     (c)  The state department of defense shall cooperate with the department of public safety to transfer the Kulani correctional facility back to the department of public safety.
     (d)  The department of public safety is urged to assist the state department of defense in identifying alternative sites for the Kulani Youth Challenge Academy.
     (e)  The department of public safety, when staffing the Kulani correctional facility upon its reopening, shall first offer positions to former Kulani employees in the positions they held prior to the closing of the facility and, with the exception of those who wish to remain in a different location, offer positions to any and all employees who may have been bumped, terminated, or accepted employment in a new geographical location regardless of any agreements made between the employee and the employer regarding transferring back to their original workplace.  Positions shall be offered first to former employees of Kulani and Hawaii Community Correctional Center before allowing any other transfers from employees who were not affected or employed by Kulani or Hawaii Community Correctional Center at the time of the closing.
     (f)  The department of public safety shall submit its plan and any related findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $300,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for plans and design to build a housing facility for the Youth Challenge Academy on the Keaukaha Military Reservation site.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of defense for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kulani Correctional Facility; Reopening; Youth Challenge Academy
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Public Safety to develop a plan to reopen the Kulani Correctional Facility.  Requires a report to the Legislature.  Appropriates funds for plans and design for a new housing facility for the Youth Challenge Academy at Keaukaha Military Reservation.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
