HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2132
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HUMAN SERVICES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 348-8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is established within the department a state rehabilitation council.  The council shall consist of twenty-one members appointed by the governor as provided in section 26-34 and without regard to section 78-4.  The members shall include:
     (1)  At least one representative of a parent training and information center;
     (2)  At least one representative of the client assistance program;
     (3)  At least one qualified vocational rehabilitation counselor with knowledge of and experience with vocational rehabilitation programs, who shall serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member if employed by the vocational rehabilitation division of the department;
     (4)  At least one representative of community rehabilitation program service providers;
     (5)  Four representatives of business, industry, and labor;
     (6)  Representatives of disability advocacy groups representing a cross section of individuals with physical, cognitive, sensory, and mental disabilities, and parents, family members, guardians, advocates, or authorized representatives of individuals with disabilities who have difficulty in representing themselves or are unable due to their disabilities to represent themselves;
     (7)  Current or former applicants for or recipients of vocational rehabilitation services;
     (8)  At least one representative of the state educational agency responsible for the public education of students with disabilities;
     (9)  At least one representative of the state workforce development council; and
    (10)  The administrator of the vocational rehabilitation division of the department, who shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member;
provided that the council shall include at least one member from each county; and provided further that a majority of the council members shall be persons who have disabilities and are not employed by the vocational rehabilitation division of the department.  The council members shall elect a chairperson from the membership.  Each member of the council shall serve a three-year term but may not serve more than two consecutive full terms.  Any vacancy occurring in the council membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, except that the governor may delegate the authority to fill such a vacancy to the remaining members of the council after making the original appointment.
     The minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to do business shall be ten.  The number of votes necessary to validate any action of the council shall be the concurrence of at least a majority of quorum."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that this Act shall be repealed on June 30, 2014, and section 348-8(a), Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall be reenacted in the form in which it read on the day before the effective date of this Act.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Rehabilitation Council
 
Description:
Establishes for the State Rehabilitation Council that at least ten members constitutes a quorum to do business and a concurrence of at least a majority of quorum is necessary to validate council action.  Repeals June 30, 2014.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
