HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2107
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO COPPER REDEMPTION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1: Section 445-233, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§445-233  Statement required.  (a)  Every scrap dealer, when the dealer purchases scrap within the State, shall obtain a written statement signed by the seller certifying that the seller has the lawful right to sell and dispose of the scrap.  This statement shall also contain the seller's name; the seller's business or residence address; the seller's occupation; a description, including serial numbers and other identifying marks, when practical, of every scrap; the amount received by the seller; the date, time, and place of the sale; and the license number of any vehicle used to deliver the property to the place of purchase.
     (b)  If the scrap presented for purchase is copper, or a beer keg, in whole or in part, the seller shall provide a copy of a receipt that describes, with particularity:
     (1)  The exact item that is being offered for sale;
     (2)  Who issued the receipt;
     (3)  The date of sale of the item prior to the item's being offered to the scrap dealer; and
     (4)  The price, if any, of the item when obtained by the seller.
     (c)  If a receipt is not available, the seller shall provide to the scrap dealer a notarized declaration, describing with particularity:
     (1)  The exact item that is being offered for sale;
     (2)  Who sold or otherwise transferred the item to the seller;
     (3)  The date of sale of the item; and
     (4)  The price, if any, of the item when obtained by the seller.
     (d)  If the seller does not provide a copy of the receipt or the notarized declaration as required by subsections (b) and (c), the scrap dealer shall not purchase the copper, or beer keg, in whole or in part, and shall report the attempted sale to the police.
     (e)  If the scrap dealer purchases any copper or beer keg, in whole or in part, the scrap dealer shall take a photograph or photographs of all of the copper or any beer keg offered for sale.
     (f)  The scrap dealer shall also require the seller to verify the seller's identity by presenting a valid photo identification card or license issued by a federal or state government agency authorized to issue valid identification.  If the scrap being offered for sale is copper, or a beer keg, in whole or in part, the scrap dealer shall:
     (1)  Take a photograph of the seller; or
     (2)  Make a photocopy of the identification card or license of the seller.
     (g)  If the scrap presented is copper, in whole or in part, the dealer shall require the seller to present a valid contractor's license under chapter 444.  The scrap dealer shall make a photocopy of the contractor's license.  If the seller does not provide a valid contractor's license under chapter 444, the scrap dealer shall not purchase the copper, in whole or in part, and shall report the attempted sale to the police.
     [(g)] (h)  The scrap dealer shall keep at the dealer's place of business the signed written statement, the receipt or notarized declaration required by subsections (b) and (c), the photographs required by subsection (e), [and] the photocopy of the identification card or license and photograph of the seller required by subsection (f), and the photocopy of the contractor's license under subsection (g), if applicable, from the seller for a period of two years after the date of purchase and the statement, the receipt or notarized declaration required by subsections (b) and (c), the photographs required by subsection (e), [and] the photocopy and photograph required by subsection (f), and the photocopy of the contractor's license under subsection (g), if applicable, may be examined at any time by the treasurer, the chief of police, the attorney general, the prosecuting attorney, or their designees.
     [(h)] (i)  Public utilities, as defined in section 269-1, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), [and] (c)[.], and (g).  When the seller is a public utility, the scrap dealer shall not be required to obtain the statement required by subsection (a), and the scrap dealer shall not be prohibited by subsection (d) from purchasing the copper from the public utility."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Scrap Metal Dealers, Copper Redemption, Licensed Contractors, Copper Theft
 
Description:
Requires that scrap metal dealers only purchase copper from licensed contractors.
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
