HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2124
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FIRE PROTECTION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this bill is to clarify and update the authority of the county fire chief to review plans and specifications for the construction, alteration and other installations for buildings or properties.  This section of statute used language that was applicable over thirty years ago.  Building occupancies and classifications have since changed and each county fire chief's plans review authority varies depending on agreements with their respective building officials.  This Act broadly defines the fire chief's jurisdictional authority to review building plans for all counties.
     SECTION 2.  Section 132-9, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§132-9  Submission of building plans for approval.  [Before work commences upon the construction of any building of the types hereinafter enumerated, or upon an alteration or addition to any building, the plans and specifications for the work shall be submitted to the county fire chief.  Neither the person causing the construction, alteration, or addition to be made, nor the person's architect or agent, shall authorize, order, or permit the work thereon to start and no contractor, builder, or other person may start the work, before approval of the plans and specifications by the county fire chief.
     The foregoing provisions shall be applicable to buildings, the whole or any part of which are being, or intended to be, used as:
     (1)  Hospitals, sanitariums, asylums, children's nurseries, and other such institutions;
     (2)  Hotels, apartment houses, rooming houses, and tenement houses; provided that when any such building to be constructed or upon which alterations or additions are to be made, is only one story high, with living accommodations permanently designated and intended for less than twenty-five persons, this section shall not apply;
     (3)  Schools, churches, auditoriums, halls, gymnasiums, dance halls, nightclubs, factories, office buildings, stores, and all other such buildings where persons work, congregate, or assemble; provided that when any such building to be constructed, or upon which alterations or additions are to be made, is only one story high, and is permanently designated and intended for a total accommodation at any one time of less than one hundred persons, this section shall not apply.]
(a)  The county fire chief may require plans, documentation to show compliance with the fire code, and fire and life safety standards for the following:
     (1)  Construction, alteration, rehabilitation, or addition to any building, structure, or property;
     (2)  Change in use of buildings or property, or change in occupancy; and
     (3)  Installation or alteration of any procedures, equipment, property or structure for any life safety or fire protection systems that includes, but is not limited to, one- and two-family dwellings.
     (b)  No work shall be authorized or commenced before the building plans and specifications are approved by the county fire chief and other agencies having jurisdiction, and the issuance of required permits.
     (c)  This section shall be applicable to the State [and], the counties, and other municipal subdivisions, and their officers, as well as to private persons."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall apply to any building plans submitted for the approval of a respective fire chief after the effective date of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Fire Council Package; Fire Chief; Authority; Building Plans
 
Description:
Authorizes the county fire chief to require plans and documentation to show compliance with fire code and fire and life safety standards for the construction, alteration, rehabilitation, or addition to any building, structure, or property; change in use of buildings, property, or occupancy; and installation or alteration of any procedures, equipment, property, or structure for any life safety or fire protection systems.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
