HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2187
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HOMELESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that homelessness continues to be one of the State's most significant and challenging social problems.  The legislature further finds that according to a recent report, 14,200 homeless individuals were served through shelter and outreach programs in fiscal year 2011.  Of these individuals, 9,781 resided in the city and county of Honolulu.  The legislature also finds that homeless service providers estimate that 6,000 homeless people in the State need shelter each night.
     The legislature additionally finds that homelessness is a complex issue that requires continuous resources and coordinated efforts at all levels.  The legislature also finds that homeless persons face a myriad of issues, including mental illness, substance abuse, loss of employment and income, and lack of affordable housing.  Appropriate funding for programs and services tailored to address these issues is essential.
     The purpose of this Act is to better assist individuals facing or experiencing homelessness by funding various homeless and housing programs.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the homeless programs office of the department of human services, to assist homeless and at-risk homeless individuals and families with housing placement, health, education, employment, and other support services.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $15,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the rental housing trust fund.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the Hawaii housing finance and development corporation for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for substance abuse treatment and mental health support services for individuals who are homeless or at risk of becoming homeless.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for clean and sober housing support services to be administered by the alcohol and drug abuse division of the department of health.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 6.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for a homeless prevention program, to be administered by the homeless programs office of the department of human services, for short-term assistance to prevent homelessness and obtain or retain permanent housing.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 7.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for a rental assistance program for sheltered homeless who are ready to rent permanent housing in order to obtain and maintain permanent housing; provided that the maximum subsidy shall be $300 per month after households pay a minimum of thirty per cent of their adjusted income for rent.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 8.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to provide matching funds for shelter plus care grants.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 9.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Homeless; Housing; Substance Abuse; Mental Health; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates funds to the homeless programs office of the department of human services and the rental housing trust fund.  Appropriates funds to the department of health for substance abuse treatment, mental health support services, and clean and sober housing services and the department of human services for a homeless prevention program, rental assistance program, and matching funds for shelter plus care grants.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
