HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2190
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MANDATORY REPORTING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 412:3-114.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§412:3-114.5[]]  Mandatory reporting of suspected financial abuse of an elder.  (a)  A financial institution shall report suspected financial abuse that is directed towards, targets, or is committed against an elder to the department of human services and the proper local law enforcement agency if:
     (1)  In connection with providing financial services to the elder, the officer or employee of a financial institution:
         (A)  Has direct contact with the elder; or
         (B)  Reviews or approves the elder's financial documents, records, or transactions; and
     (2)  The officer or employee, within the scope of employment or professional practice:
         (A)  Observes or has knowledge of an incident the officer or employee believes in good faith appears to be financial abuse; or
         (B)  In the case of officers or employers who do not have direct contact with the elder, has a good faith suspicion that financial abuse has occurred or may be occurring, based solely on the information present at the time of reviewing or approving the document, record, or transaction.
     (b)  Suspected financial abuse shall be reported immediately to the department and the proper local law enforcement agency by telephone and by written report sent within five business days.
     (c)  Upon notification by a financial institution of suspected financial abuse, the department, in a timely manner, shall determine whether the department has jurisdiction over the elder involved; and if not, shall notify the financial institution[, which shall then notify] and the proper local law enforcement agency immediately by telephone [and forward the written report to the agency within three business days.  A financial institution shall not be liable for failing to report suspected financial abuse to a local law enforcement agency in cases in which the department fails to notify the institution of the department's lack of jurisdiction].
     (d)  The department shall disclose to the proper local law enforcement agency relevant information relating to suspect of financial abuse of an elder in the department's physical custody within five days of determining whether the department has jurisdiction over the elder involved.  The local law enforcement agency shall disclose to the department relevant information relating to suspected financial abuse of an elder in the agency's physical custody in a timely manner after receiving the written report of suspected financial abuse.  The department and the local law enforcement shall have a continuing duty to share, in a timely manner, information relating to suspected financial abuse of the elder involved until the investigation into the report of suspected financial abuse is concluded.
     [(d)] (e)  Notwithstanding any other state law to the contrary, including but not limited to laws concerning confidentiality, any person, including the financial institution, who:
     (1)  Participates in the making of a report pursuant to this section; and
     (2)  Believes, in good faith, that the action is warranted by facts known to that person,
shall have immunity from any liability, civil or criminal, that might be otherwise incurred or imposed by or as a result of the making of the report.  Any person making the report shall have the same immunity with respect to participation in any judicial proceeding resulting from the report.
     [(e)] (f)  For the purposes of this section:
     "Department" means the department of human services.
     "Elder" means a person who is sixty-two years of age or older.
     "Financial abuse" means financial abuse or economic exploitation."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Financial Abuse; Elderly; Mandatory Reporting
 
 
Description:
Requires suspected financial abuse of an elder to be reported to local law enforcement and DHS.  Mandates sharing of records between DHS and local law enforcement.
 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
