HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
212
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HISTORIC PRESERVATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that with advances in ground penetrating x-ray scanning device and archeological technology, bones and artifacts can be identified and studied prior to digging and excavating a site.  Ground penetrating x-ray technology, while costly, has the ability to prevent damage to historical artifacts while saving the historic preservation division precious time from having to extract these pieces from the ground.
     The legislature also finds that a system to record and store data from ground penetrating x-ray technology will enable the data to be transformed into useable archaeological information.  A geographical information system that captures, stores, analyzes, manages, and presents data is vital to merging existing maps with any images and information provided by new archaeological technology.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the state historic preservation officer to explore the use of archaeological technology, including ground penetrating x-ray devices and geographic information systems, and determine whether acquiring, maintaining, and using the technology is feasible.
     SECTION 2.  The state historic preservation officer shall review current archaeological technology, including a ground penetrating x-ray device and geographic information system that have the ability to identify and map artifacts in the ground without the need for excavation.  The state historic preservation officer shall determine:
     (1)  The costs associated with acquiring, maintaining, and using a ground penetrating x-ray device and geographic information system that have the ability to identify and map artifacts in the ground without the need for excavation; and
     (2)  Whether use of any of the archaeological equipment by the division is feasible based upon the costs of the technology and the benefit to the historic preservation division in preserving historical bones and artifacts.
     SECTION 3.  The state historic preservation officer shall report any findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Historic Preservation; Archaeological Technology
 
Description:
Requires the state historic preservation officer to explore the use of archaeological technology, including a ground penetrating x-ray and geographic information system, and determine whether acquiring, maintaining, and using the technology is feasible.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
