HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2183
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE CONVENTION CENTER.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 201B, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART   .  CONVENTION CENTER DISTRICT
     §201B-A  Convention center district; purpose.  The authority shall serve as the local redevelopment authority of the district to develop uses and activities that promote and encourage use of the convention center.  In addition to any other of its duties under this chapter, the authority shall:
     (1)  Consult with recorded landowners in the district to implement activities related to and supportive of the convention center;
     (2)  Assist land users to manage their properties and implement activities related to and supportive of the convention center; and
     (3)  Work with federal, state, county, and other agencies to ensure that infrastructural support is provided for the district.
     §201B-B  District established; boundaries.  (a)  The convention center district is hereby established.  The district shall include that area within the boundaries described as follows:  The mauka, ewa, and makai perimeter of the Hawaii convention center parcel; the ewa boundary of the Ala Wai canal promenade from its intersection with the makai perimeter of the Hawaii convention center parcel until its intersection with the mauka boundary of the Ala Moana boulevard roadway; the mauka boundary of the Ala Moana boulevard roadway from its intersection with the ewa boundary of the Ala Wai promenade until the makai boundary of the Kalakaua avenue roadway; the makai boundary of the Kalakaua avenue roadway from its intersection with Ala Moana boulevard until its intersection with the ewa boundary of the Ala Wai promenade; and the ewa boundary of the Ala Wai promenade until its intersection with the mauka perimeter of the Hawaii convention center parcel.
     §201B-C  Convention center district; policies to guide development.  The following general policies to guide development shall govern the authority's actions in the district:
     (1)  The authority may engage in planning, design, and construction activities within and outside the district that are in furtherance of promoting the use of the convention center; provided that activities outside the district shall relate to infrastructural development, area-wide drainage improvements and sediment transport mitigation, roadway realignments and improvements, and other activities the authority deems necessary to carry out the redevelopment of the district and implement this part.  Studies or coordinating activities may be undertaken by the authority in conjunction with the county and appropriate federal and state agencies and may address infrastructural systems, natural resource systems, and other activities;
     (2)  Planning, replanning, rehabilitation, development, redevelopment, and other preparations for the promotion of convention center use shall be pursued;
     (3)  Hawaiian archaeological, historic, and cultural sites shall be preserved and protected to the extent feasible while allowing for continued use of the property for promotion of use of the convention center;
     (4)  Endangered species of flora and fauna shall be preserved and protected to the extent feasible;
     (5)  Land use and redevelopment activities within the district shall be coordinated with and, to the extent possible, complement existing county and state policies, plans, and programs affecting the district; and
     (6)  Public facilities within the district shall be planned, located, and developed to support the redevelopment policies established by this part for the district and rules adopted pursuant thereto.
     §201B-D  Rules; adoption.  The authority shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to carry out the purposes of this part."
     SECTION 2.  Section 201B-8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  Moneys in the convention center enterprise special fund shall be used by the authority for the payment of any and all debt service relating to the convention center, any expense arising from any and all use, operation, maintenance, alteration, improvement, or any unforeseen or unplanned repairs of the convention center, including without limitation the food and beverage service and parking service provided at the convention center facility, the sale of souvenirs, logo items, or other items, for any future major repair, maintenance, and improvement of the convention center facility as a commercial enterprise or as a world class facility for conventions, entertainment, or public events, [and] for marketing the facility pursuant to section 201B-7(a)(7)[.], and for development within the convention center district pursuant to section 201B-C."
     SECTION 3.  In codifying the new sections added by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Convention Center District; Established
 
Description:
Establishes the convention center district to develop uses and activities to promote use of the convention center.  Establishes policies to guide development within the district.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
