HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2115
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CANCER.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that of cancers affecting both men and women, cancer of the colon and rectum, also known as colorectal cancer, is the second leading killer in the United States.  According to the National Cancer Institute, in 2007, 142,672 people in the United States were diagnosed with colorectal cancer, and 53,219 people died from it.  Based on rates from 2006-2008, 5.08 per cent of men and women born today will be diagnosed with cancer of the colon and rectum during their lifetime.  Since colorectal cancer almost always develops from precancerous polyps (abnormal growth) in the colon or rectum, screening tests are an easy and effective preventative method to find precancerous polyps and detect colorectal cancer early.
     The legislature also finds that a screening program will increase detections of any cancer at an early stage, which in turn improves survival and decreases mortality rates.  With the success of the Hawaii comprehensive breast and cervical cancer control program, established by the legislature in 1997 to provide breast and cervical cancer screening, establishing a program using the Hawaii comprehensive breast and cervical cancer control program as a model is an effective approach to increase the number of screenings and early detections of colorectal cancer.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program using the Hawaii comprehensive breast and cervical cancer control program as a model, and to appropriate funds for the program.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part II to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346-    Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program.  (a)  There is established the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program, to administered by the department of human services in collaboration with the department of health, to facilitate the early detection of colorectal cancer and to assist individuals who have been diagnosed with colorectal cancer by the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program.
     (b)  The department of human services shall work collaboratively with the department of health to assist in and support the screening, education, and outreach process regardless of an individual's eligibility for medicaid coverage.
     (c)  Under the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program, the department of human services shall provide state-funded medical assistance, as available, to:
     (1)  Provide screenings for colorectal cancer to individuals who are:
          (A)  Fifty years of age or older; or
         (B)  Under the age of fifty years and at high risk for colorectal cancer;
     (2)  Provide appropriate case management and referrals for medical treatment of individuals screened through the program;
     (3)  Ensure, either directly or through coordination or an arrangement with health care providers or programs, the full continuum of care for screened individuals, including appropriate follow-up for abnormal tests, diagnostic services, therapeutic services, and treatment of detected cancers and management of unanticipated medical complications;
     (4)  Educate, train, and improve the skills of health care professionals, including allied health professionals and lay health educators, in the detection and control of colorectal cancer, which activities are carried out pursuant to the participation of the health care professionals in the program;
     (5)  Educate women regarding the risks associated with colorectal cancer; and
     (6)  Provide outreach to individuals who are at risk for colorectal cancer.
     (d)  The department of human services shall submit an annual report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session on the expenditure of all funds for the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $200,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the establishment of the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Colon and Rectum Cancer Treatment; Hawaii Colorectal Cancer Screening Program; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the Hawaii colorectal cancer screening program to assist individuals with the detection and care of colorectal cancer.  Appropriates funds for the program.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
