HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2167
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO GREEN WASTE RECYCLING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that there is an opportunity to develop green infrastructure that benefits the State.  The research, job creation, and environmental diligence that can be realized by green infrastructure are invaluable.  Replenishing nutrients into the soil and sustaining the health of the land is a top priority for any vision of the future.  The ability to treat organic waste and progressively ban organic waste in landfills can create a new, sustainable resource, as well as serve as a symbol of sustainable production.  Areas such as energy and food security can become vastly improved and optimized.
     "Green waste" is defined by the state department of health as "solid waste that includes leaves, grass clippings, garden and yard wastes, tree trunks, holiday trees, tree trimmings, and/or prunings."  Although there are curb side pick-ups for certain urban communities, there is a much larger source of green waste in rural areas.  A coordinated and comprehensive statewide green waste recycling and reuse system would be a profitable and sustainable system.
     Since the implementation of the deposit beverage container law (Act 176, Session Laws of Hawaii 2002) on January 1, 2005, the State has received positive feedback and a growing interest in the bottle recycling program.  The law's success has opened possibilities for more cooperative and profitable recycling projects between the State and local businesses.
     In April of 2010, the Hawaiian Electric Company, Inc., began a quest to find a long term supply of biofuels.  Given the demand for biofuel by the biggest electrical supplier in the State, there is an opportunity to create a long term partnership in which communities, businesses, and the State can benefit.
     More importantly, the recycle and reuse movement has shown that the general population supports sustainability.  It is time to incorporate green waste into the recycling movement at a statewide level so that everyone in Hawaii can benefit.  Residents and tourists alike appreciate and have an unspoken connection to the land.  The health of this land is a top priority for maintaining prosperity.
     SECTION 2.  The legislature, in coordination with the office of solid waste management of the department of health, shall hold a symposium hosting community stakeholders, business representatives, and researchers to develop initiatives for improved reuse and recycling of green waste.  The symposium shall explore:
     (1)  Possible uses of green waste in energy or fuel production and agriculture;
     (3)  Public private partnerships to create efficient and mutually beneficial relationships throughout the community;
     (4)  New technologies and alternatives;
     (5)  Incorporating alternative technologies or switching out current technologies;
     (6)  Federal funding and programs;
     (7)  Cutting edge ideas and research relating to green waste;
     (8)  A roadmap for Hawaii to recycle all green waste statewide;
     (9)  A methodology to achieve the goals set out by the Hawaii 2050 sustainability task force, including priority action 4, which issues a call to "increase recycling, reuse, and waste reduction strategies" by 2020;
    (10)  The need for a center for recycling and reuse to continuously research and test new ideas and technologies for green waste;
    (11)  The current regulatory environment between county and state agencies to determine any controlling agencies and rules that apply and any inconsistencies in definitions;
    (12)  Each county's requirements and challenges of locating, transporting, distributing, and marketing the end product of reuse and recycling; and
    (13)  Integration of all types of organics, including food waste and green waste.
     SECTION 3.  The office of solid waste management of the department of health shall submit an interim report and a final report to the legislature on the status of the initiatives established pursuant to section 2 of this Act no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 and 2014 regular sessions, respectively.  Each report shall include a description of the role that the office of solid waste management plays in carrying out the initiatives of the symposium.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Green Waste; Symposium; Office of Solid Waste Management
 
Description:
Requires the office of solid waste management to host a symposium to develop initiatives for improved reuse and recycling of green waste.  Requires a report to the legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
