HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2196
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

PART I
     SECTION 1.  In 1965, the Older Americans Act established a delivery system of services and supports for older adults.  In 1967, this service delivery system was codified into the Hawaii Revised Statutes.  With guidance from the United States Administration on Aging and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the state executive office on aging and the county offices on aging are currently making sweeping changes to transform this system to reflect current and future needs of older adults and people with disabilities.
     The purpose of this Act is to build a statewide system of support for Hawaii's older adults and their family caregivers by:
     (1)  Establishing the aging and disability resource center as a single access point to information on the full range of long-term support options;
     (2)  Enhancing the delivery of home- and community-based services through the kupuna care program; and
     (3)  Engaging seniors in community activities, encouraging healthy aging, and assisting older adults living with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia.
PART II
     SECTION 2.  The aging and disability resource center initiative is a collaborative effort led by the United States Administration on Aging and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.  This initiative seeks to streamline access to long-term services and supports for older adults, persons with disabilities, family caregivers, and providers.
     Aging and disability resource centers serve as single points of entry into the long-term services and supports system for older adults, people with disabilities, family caregivers, and providers.  A single, coordinated system of information and access for persons seeking long-term support minimizes confusion, enhances individual choice, and supports informed decision-making.  Aging and disability resource centers also help individuals and their families identify their long-term services and supports needs, understand their long-term care options, and develop and activate a long-term services and supports plan.
     The purpose of this part is to create a single point of entry into Hawaii's long-term care resources by:
     (1)  Formally establishing the aging and disability resource center within the executive office on aging; and
     (2)  Appropriating funds for the statewide development of the aging and disability resource center.
     SECTION 3.  Chapter 349, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART    .  AGING AND DISABILITY RESOURCE CENTER
     §349-    Aging and disability resource center.  (a)  There is established the aging and disability resource center in the executive office on aging.  The purpose of the aging and disability resource center shall be to integrate the full range of long-term services and supports into a single, coordinated system.
     (b)  The aging and disability resource center shall be available in every county and shall be a place where individuals of all ages, incomes, and disabilities can be directed to receive information on the full range of long-term support options, including:
     (1)  Medicaid, medicare, Older Americans Act, Veterans Administration, and other federal, state, and county revenue-funded programs and services;
     (2)  Privately administered programs and services;
     (3)  Application process for publicly funded programs;
     (4)  Services and supports for individuals with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia;
     (5)  Transportation services;
     (6)  Housing options;
     (7)  Elder rights protection;
     (8)  Hospital and nursing home discharge planning and care transition;
     (9)  Health, prevention, and wellness programs;
    (10)  Support for grandparents and other relatives raising grandchildren; and
    (11)  Informal and family caregiver support services.
     (c)  The aging and disability resource center shall target services to:
     (1)  Individuals aged sixty and older;
     (2)  Individuals of any age with physical disabilities, serious mental illness, dementia, developmental disabilities, or intellectual disabilities;
     (3)  Informal and family caregivers providing assistance to someone needing long-term services and supports;
     (4)  Health care professionals seeking assistance on behalf of their clients; and
     (5)  Individuals planning for their future long-term support needs.
     (d)  Each area agency on aging shall implement an aging and disability resource center within its respective geographic service area."
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $1,427,461 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the establishment of aging and disability resource centers.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health's executive office on aging for the purposes of this part.
PART III
     SECTION 5.  According to the executive office on aging, the elderly population in Hawaii is one of the fastest growing in the country.  Studies conducted by the executive office on aging and the four county area agencies on aging have indicated that the elderly in Hawaii have a significant need for assistance in various areas and this need is outpacing the ability to provide assistance.
     The kupuna care program was established in 1999 as a collaborative effort by several agencies in Hawaii to address the needs of the elderly population and the issues arising from those needs.  The program is home- and community-based, designed to address the increased need for affordable long-term care and the desire to remain in the community.  The goal of kupuna care is to give Hawaii's elderly population access to affordable and quality home- and community-based services that are client-centered and family-supportive, allowing the elderly to live with independence and dignity.
     The purpose of this part is to fill an important gap in assistance for the elderly in Hawaii by appropriating funds for the kupuna care program.
     SECTION 6.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $4,200,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the kupuna care program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health's executive office on aging for the purposes of this part.
PART IV
     SECTION 7.  The legislature finds that multi-service senior centers offer a wide selection of daily events and activities, classes, intergenerational opportunities, computer education, cultural activities, fitness and health programs, and social services for Hawaii's older adults.  Senior centers are a venue for older adults to socialize in a safe and healthy environment, thus enabling participants to remain active and engaged in the community.
     Another opportunity to engage seniors is through health promotion activities.  Hawaii's healthy aging partnership program is a statewide coalition established in 2003 to improve the well-being of older adults by adapting evidence-based health promotion programs to our multi-cultural population.
     In spite of the evidence-based programs that keep older adults healthy and independent, among the more common diseases that Hawaii's elderly battle are Alzheimer's disease and related dementia.  Six out of ten people with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia will wander during the course of their illness.  Wandering can be dangerous and sometimes fatal, and causes stress among caregivers and family members.
     The legislature finds that there are registration services through which individuals who wander can be more easily located, identified, and returned safely to their families.  These services also aid police and other first responders in the safe return of the elderly who are found but who cannot remember essential contact information.
     The purpose of this part is to appropriate funds to:
     (1)  The healthy aging partnership program;
     (2)  Senior centers; and
     (3)  Support and promote participation in elder registration services.
     SECTION 8.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $426,722 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the healthy aging partnership program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health's executive office on aging for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 9.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $285,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to provide funding for grants, pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, for senior centers and to be distributed as follows:
     (1)  Lanakila multi-purpose senior center  $175,000
     (2)  Moiliili senior center                $50,000
     (3)  Waikiki community center                   $60,000
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health's executive office on aging for the purposes of this part.
     SECTION 10.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $50,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant, pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to the Alzheimer's Association, Aloha Chapter, to:
     (1)  Establish a wanderer's registration service to protect individuals with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia;
     (2)  Conduct targeted outreach throughout the State to increase enrollment in the national wanderer's registry and offer scholarships and subsidies to low-income families, as defined by the United States Department of Health and Human Services' 2011 poverty guidelines for Hawaii, who want to enroll in the registry;
     (3)  Conduct annual training for first responders and other community members to increase awareness and provide ongoing education on best practices for search and rescue efforts for people with dementia; and
     (4)  When authorized by the family, issue customized updates and information through social media to provide alerts to community members and assist with search and rescue efforts.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health's executive office on aging for the purposes of this part.
PART V
     SECTION 11.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012; provided that section 3 shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kupuna Caucus; Aging and Disability Resource Center; Kupuna Care; Healthy Aging Partnership Program; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the aging and disability resource center in the executive office on aging. Appropriates funds for the aging and disability resource center, kupuna care program, healthy aging partnership program, senior centers, and elder registration services.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
