HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2254
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE PRETAX TRANSPORTATION BENEFIT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the department of human resources development currently operates a pretax transportation benefit pilot program in the city and county of Honolulu for any employee of the state government who:
     (1)  Is an employee of the State executive branch (excluding the department of education) who is eligible to participate in the State of Hawaii employees' retirement system;
     (2)  Lives and works on Oahu; and
     (3)  Does not have parking in a state-controlled lot with a parking payroll deduction.
The pilot program is operated under the State's qualified transportation fringe benefit plan, in accordance with section 132(f) of the Internal Revenue Code, and authorized under the federal Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century for eligible State of Hawaii executive branch employees.  This means that eligible employees may purchase public bus passes, Handi-Van fare coupons, and vouchers for the cost of their vanpool Hawaii seat fares through payroll deductions before federal, State, and Federal Insurance Contributions Act taxes are withheld, thereby increasing their take-home pay.  In other words, an eligible employee on Oahu may authorize the State to have the employee's bus pass expense, the cost of a preset amount of Handi-Van fare coupons, or vanpool Hawaii seat fees deducted from the employee's paycheck on a pretax basis.  The State, as employer, will purchase bus passes, Handi-Van fare coupons, or vouchers redeemable with vanpool Hawaii to cover seat fees for eligible employees and distribute them to eligible employees on a monthly basis.  As of June 2008, the enrollment for senior and disability annual bus passes was also included in the pilot program.
     The duration of the pilot program is determined by the director of human resources development, and as of 2008, the maximum allowance per month for combined commuter highway vehicle transportation and transit pass expenses was $115.
     The savings for each employee will vary depending on the employee's tax bracket.  For example, based on an annual salary of $24,000, a tax savings of $138.24, $253.68, or $181.53 can be gained through participation in the pilot transportation benefit plan for eligible employees who buy bus passes, ride the Handi-Van, or carpool via vanpool Hawaii, respectively.
     The legislature finds that the pilot program has been successful.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the director of human resources development to make the program permanent and to expand the pilot program to all islands having a public transit system and to employees of the legislature residing in counties having a population of over five hundred thousand persons.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 78, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§78-     Pretax transportation benefit program; statewide; reports.  (a)  The director of human resources development shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to operate a pretax transportation benefit program on all islands that have a public transit system and for employees of the legislature residing in counties having a population of over five hundred thousand persons.
     (b)  No later than December 31, 2012, the director of human resources development shall submit an interim report to the legislature detailing the department's progress in implementing subsection (a).  No later than December 31 of each year thereafter, the director of human resources development shall report its findings and recommendations to the legislature regarding the operation of the pretax transportation benefit program for eligible employees."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Pretax Transportation Benefit; Statewide
 
Description:
Makes permanent the pretax transportation benefit pilot program and requires the Director of Human Resources Development to expand program to all islands having a public transit system and to employees of the legislature residing in counties having a population of over five hundred thousand persons.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
