HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2267
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL PURPOSE REVENUE BONDS TO ASSIST CLEARCOM, INC., IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF BROADBAND INFRASTRUCTURE IN HAWAII.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the development of broadband infrastructure to enable access to affordable ultra high-speed internet is essential to build a vibrant and sustainable economy and workforce in Hawaii and improve the quality of life for residents.  The legislature further finds that the utilization of abandoned water mains in conjunction with Act 151, Session Laws of Hawaii 2011, provide a unique opportunity to achieve the State's "Hawaii Broadband Initiative" goals in a timely and cost effective manner.  Underground cables are protected from weather related risks and accident damage, and preserve Hawaii's uncluttered environment.  The use of abandoned water mains is a proven way to facilitate cost efficient and rapid deployment of buried fiber optic infrastructure, while minimizing the unavoidable traffic impacts that plague traditional underground construction methods, especially in the urban core.  For these reasons, the legislature finds and declares that the issuance of special purpose revenue bonds under this Act is in the public interest and for the public health, safety, and general welfare.
     SECTION 2.  Pursuant to part V, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the department of budget and finance, with the approval of the governor, is authorized to issue special purpose revenue bonds in a total amount not to exceed $100,000,000, in one or more series, for the purpose of assisting Clearcom, Inc., or a partnership headed by Clearcom, Inc., with the planning, permitting, designing, constructing, equipping, and operating of broadband infrastructure at locations throughout the State.  The legislature hereby finds and determines that the planning, permitting, designing, constructing, and operating of hydropower plants constitutes a project as defined in part V, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and the financing thereof is assistance to an industrial enterprise.
     SECTION 3.  The special purpose revenue bonds and the refunding special purpose revenue bonds issued under this Act shall be issued pursuant to part V, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, relating to the power to issue special purpose revenue bonds to assist industrial enterprises.
     SECTION 4.  The department of budget and finance is authorized, from time to time, including times subsequent to June 30, 2017, to issue special purpose revenue bonds in whatever principal amounts the department shall determine to be necessary to refund the special purpose revenue bonds authorized in section 2 and to refund special purpose revenue bonds authorized in this section, regardless of whether the outstanding special purpose revenue bonds or refunding special purpose revenue bonds have matured or are the subject of redemption or whether the refunding special purpose revenue bonds shall be bonds for the multi-project programs described in section 2.  In making this determination, the department shall comply with federal law relating to the exemption from federal income taxation of the interest on bonds of the nature authorized by this section.
     SECTION 5.  The authorization to issue special purpose revenue bonds under this Act shall lapse on June 30, 2017.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

 
Report Title:
Special Purpose Revenue Bonds; Clearcom, Inc.; Hawaii Broadband Initiative
 
Description:
Authorizes the issuance of special purpose revenue bonds to assist Clearcom, Inc., or a partnership headed by Clearcom, Inc., with the planning, permitting, design, construction, equipping, and operating broadband infrastructure throughout the State.  Effective 7/1/12.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
