HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2202
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HEALTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that in 2005, Hawaii was selected to receive a grant from the United States Department of Health and Human Services to develop an aging and disability resource center program.  The grant was intended to help Hawaii develop "one-stop shop" centers at the community level that could serve as the entry point to long term care services and a support system. 
     Since 2005, aging and disability resource centers have been created in the counties of Kauai, Maui, Hawaii, and the city and county of Honolulu.  These centers have improved access to long term care information and options for family caregivers, the elderly, and the disabled by facilitating their search for needed services.  The legislature finds that although Hawaii has been working to develop a fully functioning aging and disability resource center program for several years, the program currently provides only limited services and information, primarily through toll-free telephone numbers and a website.
     The purpose of this Act is to create a single point of entry into Hawaii's long term care resources by:
     (1)  Formally establishing the aging and disability resource center program within the executive office on aging;
     (2)  Expanding the current responsibilities of the existing aging and disability resource centers currently administered by the counties; and
     (3)  Appropriating funds for the statewide development of the aging and disability resource center program.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 349, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART      .  AGING AND DISABILITY RESOURCE CENTER PROGRAM
     §349-    Aging and disability resource center program.  (a)  There is established the aging and disability resource center program in the executive office on aging.  The purpose of the aging and disability resource center program shall be to integrate the full range of long term care services and supports into a single, coordinated system.
     (b)  The aging and disability resource center program shall establish centers, if none currently exist, in every county.  The centers shall be the source to which individuals of all ages, incomes, and disabilities may be directed for information on and referral to the full range of long term care support options, including:
     (1)  Medicaid, medicare, Older Americans Act, Veterans Administration, and other federal, state, and county revenue-funded programs and services;
     (2)  Privately administered programs and services;
     (3)  Application process for publicly funded programs;
     (4)  Services and supports for individuals with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia;
     (5)  Transportation services;
     (6)  Housing and residential care options;
     (7)  Elder rights protection;
     (8)  Hospital and nursing home discharge planning and care transition;
     (9)  Health, prevention, and wellness programs;
    (10)  Support for grandparents and other relatives raising grandchildren; and
    (11)  Informal and family caregiver support services.
     (c)  The aging and disability resource center program shall target services to:
     (1)  Individuals aged sixty and older;
     (2)  Individuals of any age with physical disabilities, serious mental illness, dementia, developmental disabilities, or intellectual disabilities;
     (3)  Informal and family caregivers providing assistance to someone needing long term care services and supports;
     (4)  Health care professionals seeking assistance on behalf of their clients; and
     (5)  Individuals planning for their future long term care support needs.
     (d)  Each area agency on aging shall implement the aging and disability resource center program within its respective geographic service area.
     (e)  The aging and disability resource center program shall be responsible for:
     (1)  Coordinating the kupuna care program;
     (2)  Coordinating the long term care insurance program if established pursuant to the passing of S.B. No.      , or any subsequent versions, by the legislature during this regular session of 2012, whether before or after July 1, 2012;
     (3)  Establishing and supervising the planning, resource development, member database, and assessment of all programs within its responsibility; and
     (4)  Obtaining, storing, and protecting personally identifiable health information, and developing secure information networks and data management policies and procedures as required to comply with the provisions of the federal health insurance portability and accountability act."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the executive office on aging of the department of health to further develop and expand the aging and disability resource center program statewide.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kupuna Caucus; Executive Office on Aging; Aging and Disability Resource Center Program; Long Term Care Commission; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the aging and disability resource center program in the executive office on aging.  Appropriates funds for the further development and expansion of the aging and disability resource center program statewide.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
