HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2245
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAII-GROWN PRODUCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

SECTION 1.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-    Farm-to-school program.  (a)  There is established in the department of agriculture a farm-to-school program.  The purpose of the program is to increase procurement of locally-grown fruits and vegetables by public schools.
     (b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the department of agriculture, in consultation with the departments of health, accounting and general services, and education as necessary, may:
     (1)  Coordinate the identification and development of policies and procedures to implement and evaluate the farm-to-school program;
     (2)  Assist in marketing Hawaii-grown produce to schools by informing Hawaii food growers and distributors of food-procurement opportunities, bid procedures, school-purchasing criteria, and other requirements;
     (3)  Assist schools in connecting with Hawaii growers and distributors by informing the schools of the sources and availability of Hawaii-grown produce as well as the nutritional, environmental, and economic benefits of purchasing Hawaii-grown produce;
     (4)  Identify and recommend mechanisms that will increase the predictability of sales for Hawaii growers and distributors and the adequacy of supply for purchasing schools;
     (5)  Identify and encourage the use of existing curricula, programs, and publications to educate students on the nutritional, environmental, and economic benefits of preparing and consuming Hawaii-grown produce;
     (6)  Support efforts to advance other farm-to-school connections, such as farmers' markets on school grounds, school gardens, and community-supported agriculture; and
     (7)  Seek additional private and public funds to leverage any appropriations.
     (c)  As used in this section:
     "Hawaii-grown produce" means fruits and vegetables grown or raised in the State that are unprocessed, minimally processed, flash frozen, or otherwise prepared and handled to maintain their freshness while providing convenience to the user.
     "Minimally processed food" means food that has only been cleaned, washed, cut, or portioned."
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There shall be established a Hawaii-grown produce in schools task force to be placed within the department of agriculture for administrative purposes only.
     (b)  The task force shall:
     (1)  Examine the feasibility of establishing school gardens to grow food for consumption as part of each school's lunch program, specifically looking at food-safety-certification issues;
     (2)  Examine the feasibility of establishing a Hawaii-grown fresh fruit and vegetable program to be modeled after the United States Department of Agriculture Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program, as described in Title 42 United States Code Section 769(g); and
     (3)  Advise the department of agriculture in the creation and implementation of the farm-to-school program established pursuant to section 302A‑  , Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     (c)  The task force shall consist of the following members:
     (1)  The chairperson of the board of agriculture or the chairperson's designee;
     (2)  The superintendent of education or the superintendent's designee;
     (3)  The director of health or the director's designee;
     (4)  A representative from the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation;
     (5)  A representative from the Kokua Hawai‘i Foundation;
     (6)  The executive director of the Hawaii Association of Independent Schools or the executive director's designee; and
     (7)  Any additional members to be determined by the chairperson of the board of agriculture.
     (d)  The task force shall submit its recommendations and any proposed legislation to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (e) No member pursuant to paragraph 4, 5, 6, or 7 of subsection (c) shall be made subject to Chapter 84, Hawaii Revised Statutes, solely because of that member's participation as a member of the task force.
     (f) The Hawaii-grown produce in schools task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $         or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the farm-to-school program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.   SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2050.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii-Grown Produce; Farm-to-School
 
Description:
Establishes the farm-to-school program in the department of agriculture to increase the procurement of locally-grown fruits and vegetables.  Establishes a task force within the Department of Agriculture to examine the feasibility of establishing school gardens and creating a Hawaii-grown Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program; and to advise the Department of Agriculture in the creation and implementation of the Farm-to-School Program.  Adds an appropriation section to be expended by the Department of Agriculture.  Effective July 1, 2050.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
