HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2279
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CONTRACTORS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 444, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§444-    Licensing; power of board to accept equivalent knowledge.  The board in its discretion may accept any reasonably equivalent knowledge, training, or experience of the applicant for a license in lieu of a specific experience requirement, including self-employed or unlicensed experience, if upon investigation and verification, the board makes a detailed written finding to that effect and the written finding is made available for public inspection."
     SECTION 2.  Section 444-11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  No license hereunder shall be issued to:
     (1)  Any person unless the person has filed an application and paid the applicable fees;
     (2)  Any person unless the person meets the experience requirements as prescribed in the board's rules; provided that the board may accept experience [acquired on a self-employed or unlicensed basis if the experience can be verified;] as provided in section 444-   ;
     (3)  Any person who does not possess a history of honesty, truthfulness, financial integrity, and fair dealing; provided that any person who during the six years prior to application has failed to satisfy an undisputed debt or a judgment relating to services or materials rendered in connection with operations as a contractor shall be presumed not to possess a history of financial integrity;
     (4)  Any person unless the person has successfully passed a written examination as prescribed by the board;
     (5)  Any individual unless the individual is age eighteen years or more;
     (6)  Any joint venture [which] that is not exempt under section 444-2(8) unless the contracting business thereof is under the direct management of a member or employee thereof, and unless the member or employee holds an appropriate license;
     (7)  Any individual who is unable to qualify as a contractor or any partnership or corporation, unless the contracting business of the individual, partnership, or corporation is under the direct management of an employee, partner, or officer thereof who holds an appropriate license;
     (8)  Any person unless the person submits satisfactory proof to the board that the person has obtained workers' compensation insurance, or has been authorized to act as a self-insurer under chapter 386 or is excluded from the requirements of chapter 386;
     (9)  Any person unless the person submits satisfactory proof to the board that the person has obtained liability insurance; or
    (10)  Any person unless the person submits a bond if required by the board under section 444-16.5."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Contractors; Licensure Requirements
 
Description:
Requires the contractors license board to accept in lieu of a specific experience requirement for licensure, equivalent knowledge, training, or experience, including self-employed or unlicensed experience, if the board investigates and makes a detailed written finding to that effect and the finding is available for public inspection.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
