HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2284
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO LANGUAGE ACCESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART  .  LANGUAGE ACCESS
     §346-A   Purpose.  Most individuals living in Hawaii read, write, speak, and understand English.  There are many individuals, however, who are limited English proficient.  Language for limited English proficient persons can be a barrier to accessing important benefits or services, understanding and exercising important rights, complying with applicable responsibilities, or understanding other information provided by state-funded programs and activities.
     The purpose of this part is to affirmatively address, on account of national origin, the language access needs of limited English proficient persons.  In providing the delivery of language accessible services, it is the intent of the legislature that those services be guided by Executive Order 13166 and succeeding provisions of federal law, regulation, or guidance.
     §346-B   Definitions.  Whenever used in this part, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
     "Access" or "participate" means to be informed of, participate in, and benefit from the services, programs, and activities offered by the State and covered entities.
     "Covered entity" means a person or organization receiving state financial assistance, including grants, purchase-of-service contracts, or any other arrangement by which the State provides or otherwise makes available assistance in the form of funds to the person or organization for the purpose of rendering services to the public.  It shall not include procurement contracts, state insurance or guaranty contracts, licenses, tax credits, or loan guarantees to private businesses of general concern that do not render services on behalf of the State.
     "Language" means human speech or the expression of ideas by written characters and includes systems used by nations, people, or other distinct communities.
     "Limited English proficient" means individuals who, on account of national origin, do not speak English as their primary language and who identify themselves as having a limited ability to read, write, speak, or understand the English language.
     "Oral language services" means the free provision of oral information necessary to enable limited English proficient persons to access or participate in services, programs, or activities of a state agency or covered entity.
     "Purchase-of-service contract" means any and all types of formal written agreements, regardless of what they may be called, between the State and any person, to purchase or otherwise acquire any service for the purpose of rendering services to the public.
     "State" or "state agency" means the executive, legislative, or judicial branches of state government, including departments, offices, commissions, boards, or other agencies within the executive, legislative, or judicial branches.
     "Vital documents" means printed documents that provide important information necessary to access or participate in services, programs, and activities of a state agency or covered entity, including but not limited to applications, outreach materials, and written notices of rights, denials, losses, or decreases in benefits or services.
     "Written language services" means the free provision of written information necessary to enable limited English proficient persons to access or participate in services, programs, or activities of a state agency or covered entity.
     §346-C   Oral and written language services.  (a)  Each state agency and all covered entities shall take reasonable steps to ensure meaningful access to services, programs, and activities by limited English proficient persons, which will be determined by a totality of circumstances, including the following factors:
     (1)  The number or proportion of limited English proficient persons served or encountered in the eligible service population;
     (2)  The frequency with which limited English proficient persons come in contact with the services, programs, or activities;
     (3)  The nature and importance of the services, programs, or activities; and
     (4)  The resources available to the State or covered entity and the costs.
     (b)  Subject to subsection (a), each state agency and covered entity shall provide competent, timely oral language services to limited English proficient persons who seek to access services, programs, or activities.
     (c)  Subject to subsection (a), each state agency and covered entity shall provide written translations of vital documents to limited English proficient persons who seek to access services, programs, or activities, as follows:
     (1)  Written translations of vital documents for each eligible limited English proficient group that constitutes five per cent or one thousand, whichever is less, of the population of persons eligible to be served or likely to be affected or encountered; or
     (2)  If there are fewer than fifty persons in a limited English proficient group that reaches the five per cent threshold in paragraph (1), written notice in the primary language to the limited English proficient language group of the right to receive competent oral interpretation of those written materials, free of cost.
     (d)  To the extent that the State requires additional personnel to provide language services based on the determination set forth in this section, the State shall hire qualified personnel who are bilingual to fill existing, budgeted vacant public contact positions.
     §346-D   Additional obligations.  (a)  Each state agency and covered entity shall establish a plan for language access.
     (b)  Each state agency's plan for language access shall be established in consultation with the executive director of the office of language access and the state agency's coordinator for language access.  State agencies receiving federal financial assistance shall file an initial language access plan with the executive director of the office of language access no later than July 1, 2007, and every two years thereafter.  All other state agencies shall file a language access plan with the executive director of the office of language access no later than July 1, 2008, and every two years thereafter.
     (c)  Each state agency shall designate a language access coordinator who shall establish and implement the plan for language access in consultation with the executive director of the office of language access and the language access advisory council.
     §346-E   Public meetings and public hearings.  (a)  State agencies to which this part applies shall not be required to translate meeting notices, agendas, or minutes.
     (b)  Subject to section 346-C, oral language services for public meetings or public hearings held by the legislature shall be provided if requested at least forty-eight hours in advance of the meeting or hearing.  Where the notice of any public meeting or public hearing is posted less than forty–eight hours in advance of the meeting or hearing, oral language services shall be provided if requested at least twenty-four hours in advance of the meeting or hearing.
     §346-F   Executive director of the office of language access; duties.  There is established within the department of human services, for administrative purposes only, an office of language access.  The head of the office shall be known as the executive director of the office of language access, hereinafter referred to as executive director.  The executive director shall be appointed by the governor without regard to chapter 76.  The executive director shall:
     (1)  Provide oversight, central coordination, and technical assistance to state agencies in their implementation of language access requirements under this part or under any other law, regulation, or guidance;
     (2)  Provide technical assistance to covered entities in their implementation of this part;
     (3)  Review and monitor each state agency's language access plan for compliance with this part;
     (4)  Where reasonable access is not provided, endeavor to eliminate the barrier using informal methods such as conference, conciliation, mediation, or persuasion.  Where the language access barrier cannot be eliminated by informal methods, the executive director shall submit a written report with the executive director's opinion and recommendation to the state agency or the covered entity.  The executive director may request the state agency or the covered entity to notify the executive director, within a specified time, of any action taken on the executive director's recommendation;
     (5)  Consult with language access coordinators, the language access advisory council, and department directors or their equivalent;
     (6)  Subject to section 346-C, create, distribute to the State, and make available to covered entities multilingual signage in the more frequently encountered languages in the State, and other languages as needed, informing individuals of their right to free oral language services and inviting them to identify themselves as persons needing services; and
     (7)  Adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 to address the language needs of limited English proficient persons.
     §346-G   Language access advisory council.  (a)  There is established the language access advisory council within the department of human services for administrative purposes.  The council shall consist of the following members to be appointed by the governor:
     (1)  One representative from the state government;
     (2)  One representative from a covered entity;
     (3)  One bilingual case management worker, or an individual who is or has been employed by a state-funded immigrant service agency or program;
     (4)  One representative of an advocacy organization that provides services to limited English proficient persons;
     (5)  One member from the limited English proficient population who has an interest in the provision of oral language services;
     (6)  One representative of the University of Hawaii department of language and linguistics who provides professional training in interpretation and translation;
     (7)  One representative of a Hawaiian language advocacy organization;
     (8)  One representative of a professional interpreter's organization;
     (9)  One representative of a bilingual referral service or program;
    (10)  One representative residing in the county of Hawaii who has an interest in language access;
    (11)  One representative residing in the county of Kauai who has an interest in language access;
    (12)  One representative residing in the county of Maui who has an interest in language access;
    (13)  One representative residing in the city and county of Honolulu who has an interest in language access;
    (14)  The executive director of the Hawaii civil rights commission or authorized representative, as ex-officio member;
    (15)  One representative from the disability and communication access board, as an ex-officio member; and
    (16)  The executive director, as ex-officio member.
     (b)  Members shall be appointed in accordance with section 26-34.  The terms of the members shall be for four years; provided that the governor may reduce the terms of those initially appointed so as to provide, as nearly as can be, for the expiration of an equal number of terms at intervals of one year.  The council shall select one of its members to serve as chair.  No member of the council shall receive any compensation for council services, but shall be allowed necessary expenses for travel, board, and lodging incurred in the performance of council duties.
     (c)  The language access advisory council shall serve in an advisory capacity to the executive director, providing input on:
     (1)  Implementation and compliance with this part;
     (2)  The quality of oral and written language services provided under this part; and
     (3)  The adequacy of a state agency or covered entity's dissemination and training of its employees likely to have contact with limited or no-English proficient persons, its policies and procedures for language services, its competency in working effectively with in-person and telephone interpreters, and its understanding of the dynamics of interpretation between clients, providers, and interpreters."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 371, part II, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is repealed.
     SECTION 3.  In codifying the new sections added by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 4.  All rights, powers, functions, and duties of the office of language access are transferred to the department of human services.
     All officers and employees whose functions are transferred by this Act shall be transferred with their functions and shall continue to perform their regular duties upon their transfer, subject to the state personnel laws and this Act.
     No officer or employee of the State having tenure shall suffer any loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefit or privilege as a consequence of this Act, and such officer or employee may be transferred or appointed to a civil service position without the necessity of examination; provided that the officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed; and provided that subsequent changes in status may be made pursuant to applicable civil service and compensation laws.
     An officer or employee of the State who does not have tenure and who may be transferred or appointed to a civil service position as a consequence of this Act shall become a civil service employee without the loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefits or privileges and without the necessity of examination; provided that such officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed.
     If an office or position held by an officer or employee having tenure is abolished, the officer or employee shall not thereby be separated from public employment, but shall remain in the employment of the State with the same pay and classification and shall be transferred to some other office or position for which the officer or employee is eligible under the personnel laws of the State as determined by the head of the department or the governor.
     SECTION 5.  All appropriations, records, equipment, machines, files, supplies, contracts, books, papers, documents, maps, and other personal property heretofore made, used, acquired, or held by the department of labor and industrial relations relating to the functions transferred to the department of human services shall be transferred with the functions to which they relate.
     SECTION 6.  All rules, policies, procedures, guidelines, and other material adopted or developed by the department of labor and industrial relations for the office of language access shall remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the department of human services pursuant to chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  In the interim, every reference to the department of labor and industrial relations in those rules, policies, procedures, guidelines, and other material is amended to refer to the department of human services, as appropriate.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 

             
Report Title:
Office of Language Access; Department of Human Services
 
Description:
Transfers authority over the Office of Language Access from the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations to the Department of Human Services.  Effective July 1, 2013.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
