HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2292
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FOSTER YOUTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that many youth entering foster care exhibit chronic health, developmental, and psychiatric disorders.  The legislature also finds that mental health and medical care needs of youth in foster care can differ from youth not in care.  One 2003 study found that eighty per cent of youth in foster care received services for mental health issues during foster care placement.  Another study found that fifty-four per cent of former foster youth had a mental health diagnosis after leaving foster care.  The same study also found that one-third of former foster youth lacked health insurance.
     The legislature further finds that former foster youth without health insurance lack access to crucial medical services, including mental health care, reproductive health services, and prescription drug coverage.  Lack of health insurance may result in high levels of emergency room and inpatient care, the progression of chronic disease, and thousands of dollars of medical debt, all of which can be devastating to former foster youth transitioning to independent lives after foster care.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of human services to automatically enroll former foster youth in an appropriate medical assistance program and automatically re-enroll former foster youth until they reach age twenty-six.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346‑    Medical assistance for former foster youth.  (a)  A former foster youth who has reached the age of majority shall be eligible for medical assistance as administered by the department.  The department shall automatically enroll the former foster youth in an appropriate medical assistance program, and shall provide automatic re-enrollment until the former foster youth reaches the age of twenty-six.
     (b)  Upon enrollment, the department shall notify the former foster youth of enrollment and provide written instructions for accessing medical care.
     (c)  The department shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 to effectuate the purposes of this section."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Former Foster Youth; Medical Assistance; Keiki Caucus
 
Description:
Requires the department of human services to automatically enroll former foster youth in an appropriate medical assistance program and automatically re-enroll former foster youth until they reach age twenty-six.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
