HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2244
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRICULTURE INSPECTORS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 141-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§141-2  Rules.  Subject to chapter 91, the department of agriculture shall adopt, amend, and repeal rules not inconsistent with law, for and concerning:
     (1)  The introduction, transportation, and propagation of trees, shrubs, herbs, and other plants;
     (2)  The quarantine, inspection, fumigation, disinfection, destruction, or exclusion, either upon introduction into the State, or at any time or place within the State, of any nursery-stock, tree, shrub, herb, vine, cut-flower, cutting, graft, scion, bud, seed, leaf, root, or rhizome; any nut, fruit, or vegetable; any grain, cereal, or legume in the natural or raw state; any moss, hay, straw, dry-grass, or other forage; any unmanufactured log, limb, or timber; or any other plant growth or plant product unprocessed or in the raw state; any sand, soil, or earth; any live bird, reptile, insect, or other animal, in any stage of development, that is in addition to the so-called domestic animals, which are provided for in section 142-2; and any box, barrel, crate, or other containers in which the articles, substances, or objects have been transported or contained, and any packing material used in connection therewith, that is or may be diseased or infested with insects or likely to assist in the transmission or dissemination of any insect or plant disease injurious, harmful, or detrimental, or likely to become injurious, harmful, or detrimental to the agricultural or horticultural industries or the forests of the State, or that is or may be in itself injurious, harmful, or detrimental to the same (included therein may be rules governing the transportation of any of the articles, substances, or objects enumerated above in this section between different localities on any one of the islands within the State);
     (3)  The establishment of a licensure program to deputize private inspectors who are not state employees for the purpose of conducting inspections in any other state of any specific article, substance, or object, or class of articles, substances, or objects, among those enumerated in this section, that is intended to be imported into Hawaii; provided that:
         (A)  The deputy inspector license shall be effective for a period of one year and may be renewed at the end of the one-year period; and
         (B)  The department may assess fees for the issuance and renewal of a deputy inspector license and for conducting inspections;
    [(3)] (4)  The prohibition of importation into the State, from any or all foreign countries or from other parts of the United States, or the shipment from one island within the State to another island therein, or the transportation from one part or locality of any island to another part or locality of the same island, of any specific article, substance, or object or class of articles, substances, or objects, among those enumerated above in this section, that is diseased or infested with insects or likely to assist in the transmission or dissemination of any insect or plant disease injurious, harmful, or detrimental or likely to be injurious, harmful, or detrimental to the agricultural or horticultural industries, or the forests of the State, or that is or may be in itself injurious, harmful, or detrimental to the same;
    [(4)] (5)  The preparation by cargo carriers of manifests of cargo transported into the State or between islands of the State and the submission of the manifests to the department; and
    [(5)] (6)  The manner in which agricultural product promotion and research activities may be undertaken, after coordinating with the agribusiness development corporation.
     All rules adopted under this section shall have the force and effect of law."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agriculture; DOA; Inspections; Deputy Inspectors; Fees
 
Description:
Requires the DOA to establish a licensure program to deputize private inspectors for the purpose of conducting inspections on other parts of the United States.  Authorizes the DOA to assess fees for licensure and inspections.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
