HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2249
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO LANDFILLS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 342H, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§342H-     Alternative daily cover; reporting.  (a)  Any alternative daily cover shall be processed to prevent gaps in the exposed landfill face.
     (b)  The following types of material may be used as alternative daily cover:
     (1)  Ash and cement kiln dust;
     (2)  Treated auto shredder waste;
     (3)  Construction and demolition waste;
     (4)  Compost;
     (5)  Green material;
     (6)  Contaminated sediment;
     (7)  Sludge;
     (8)  Shredded tires;
     (9)  Foam products;
    (10)  Geosynthetic fabric or panel products, including blankets; and
    (11)  Spray-applied cement.
The materials enumerated in paragraphs (1) to (8) may be reported as diversion.
     (c)  Permitted landfills shall track daily the types, amounts, and origins of alternative daily cover materials used.
     (d)  Permitted landfills shall provide an annual report to the department and their county counterpart of the information tracked pursuant to subsection (c)."
     SECTION 2.  Section 342H-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding three new definitions to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
     ""Active face" means the working surface of a landfill upon which solid wastes are deposited during the landfill operation prior to the placement of cover material.
     "Alternate daily cover" means cover material, other than earthen material, placed on the surface of the active face of a municipal solid waste landfill at the end of each operating day to control vectors, fires, odors, blowing litter, and scavenging.
     "Vector" means any insect or other arthropod, rodent, or other animal capable of transmitting the causative agents of human disease or disrupting the normal enjoyment of life by adversely affecting the public health and well-being."
     SECTION 3.  Section 342G-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§342G-2[]]  Solid waste management priorities.  (a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hawaii Integrated Solid Waste Management Act".
     (b)  In implementing this chapter, the department and each county shall consider the following solid waste management practices and processing methods in their order of priority:
     (1)  Source reduction;
     (2)  Recycling and bioconversion, including composting; and
     (3)  Landfilling and incineration.
The respective roles of landfilling and incineration shall be left to each county's discretion.
     (c)  In implementing this chapter, the department and each county shall consider the minimization of litter and illegal dumping as a design factor in the development of integrated solid waste management programs.
     (d)  In implementing this chapter, the department and each county shall encourage recycling and facilitate the disposal of residual wastes produced in the recycling process.  To the maximum extent practicable, all state and county agencies shall give preferential treatment to the disposal of residual recycling wastes in landfill and incineration disposal facilities.  No state or county agency shall prohibit the disposal of residual recycling wastes in landfill or incineration disposal facilities."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Landfills; Alternate Daily Cover; Residual Recycling Waste
 
Description:
Requires permitted landfills to track and report the types of alternate daily covers used.  Places a preference on the disposal of residual recycling waste in landfills and incinerators and requires state and county agencies to accept such disposals.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
