HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2269
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that a shortage of school supplies for the classroom and funds to purchase the supplies has been an ongoing problem for many years.  The legislature believes that to properly address this problem, purchasing power should be concentrated at the classroom level:  debit card systems can be implemented so teachers can use the debit cards for specific purchases within a set dollar limit.
     The benefits of a debit card system include:
     (1)  Streamlining the process by which teachers can purchase necessary school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies, thereby eliminating the time required to obtain a product and the time lag for reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses; and
     (2)  Providing teachers with flexibility for their purchases and allowing them to take advantage of school discounts and sales in the community.
     The legislature further finds that there are banks that can assist with the establishment of debit card system accounts, at little or no cost.  The system can be set up to provide up-to-date spending information.
     The purpose of this Act is to allow the principal of each public school to establish and use a debit card system based at the individual school level for the purpose of purchasing school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-     Purchases of supplies; debit card system.  The principal of each public school may establish and use a debit card system to be based at the individual school level for the purpose of purchasing school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies, as deemed appropriate by the school's academic and financial plans."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        ,or so much thereof as may be necessary, for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the implementation of a debit card system based at the individual school level for the purpose of purchasing school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Education; School Supplies; Debit Card System
 
Description:
Allows the principal of each public school to establish and use a debit card system based at the individual school level for the purpose of purchasing school supplies and other related curriculum support supplies.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
