HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2268
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SMALL BUSINESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature recognizes that small businesses are an integral part of Hawaii's economy, comprising over ninety-five per cent of employers in the State and providing an estimated fifty-five per cent of private-sector jobs.  Small business advocates have repeatedly raised concerns regarding regulatory processes.  The small business regulatory review board was established in 1998 to support small businesses by addressing concerns regarding regulatory issues.  Regulatory processes should be reviewed periodically to ensure that they remain current and relevant, thereby creating a dynamic business environment and encouraging a more robust economy.
     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to require the department of business, economic development, and tourism to convene a working group to identify redundant and obsolete state and county laws related to small business.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall convene a working group to identify redundant and obsolete laws related to small business.  The working group shall be attached to the small business regulatory review board for administrative purposes.
     (b)  The working group shall be composed of:
     (1)  The director of business, economic development, and tourism, or the director's designee, who shall serve as the chair of the working group;
     (2)  Five individuals representing private-sector businesses and organizations, selected by the chair of the working group and who shall not be made subject to chapter 84, Hawaii Revised Statutes, solely because of their participation as members of the working group; and
     (3)  Five individuals representing public-sector agencies or departments, selected by the chair of the working group.
     (c)  The working group shall review and make recommendations regarding laws affecting small businesses among the following sources of law:
     (1)  Hawaii Revised Statutes;
     (2)  Hawaii Administrative Rules; and
     (3)  County ordinances.
     (d)  The working group shall submit reports of its findings and recommendations, including proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 and 2014 regular sessions.
     (e)  The working group shall cease to exist on June 30, 2014.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Small Business; Redundant and Obsolete Laws; Working Group
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism to convene a working group, administratively attached to the Small Business Regulatory Review Board, to identify redundant and obsolete state and county laws related to small business.  Requires reports to the Legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
