HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2263
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE CODE OF ETHICS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Policy makers, state agency leaders, candidates for state elective offices, and state board and commission members are required every year to file financial disclosure statements to the state ethics commission.  However, only the financial disclosure statements of the governor, lieutenant governor, legislators, and state department directors and their deputies are public records and available for inspection and duplication.  Thus, the financial disclosure statements of members who serve on state boards and commissions are not considered public documents despite some board or commission members holding discretionary authority to approve projects or issue permits or licenses that may impact state government, business, and economy.  This type of authority may pose conflicts of interest, of which the public may be unaware.
     The purpose of this Act is to further ensure transparency and accountability of individuals serving in state government by making the financial disclosure statements of state board and commission members holding permitting and licensing official authority public documents and available for public inspection.
     SECTION 2.  Section 84-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (d) to read as follows:
     "(d)  The financial disclosure statements of the following persons shall be public records and available for inspection and duplication:
     (1)  The governor, the lieutenant governor, the members of the legislature, candidates for and delegates to the constitutional convention, the trustees of the office of Hawaiian affairs, and candidates for state elective offices;
     (2)  The directors of the state departments and their deputies, regardless of the titles by which the foregoing persons are designated; provided that with respect to the department of the attorney general, the foregoing shall apply only to the attorney general and the first deputy attorney general;
     (3)  The administrative director of the State;
     (4)  The president, the vice presidents, the assistant vice presidents, the chancellors, and the provosts of the University of Hawaii;
     (5)  The members of the board of education and the superintendent, the deputy superintendent, the state librarian, and the deputy state librarian of the department of education;
     (6)  The administrative director and the deputy director of the courts; [and]
     (7)  The administrator and the assistant administrator of the office of Hawaiian affairs[.]; and
     (8)  The members of state boards or commissions that have official authority that includes approving, issuing, or renewing permits or licenses relating to land use or water use."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Financial Disclosure Statements; Boards and Commissions; Public Documents
 
Description:
Allows the financial disclosure statements of the members of state boards and commissions holding official authority over permitting or licensing of land use and water use related matters to be public documents and available for public inspection.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
