HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2330
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the temperature of Earth's surface has increased over the past century, and 2009 tied with several other recent years as the second warmest year on record.  In Hawaii, warming has contributed to increased air temperature, decreased rainfall and streamflow, increased rainfall intensity, acidification of the oceans, increased ocean temperature, and sea level rise.  Scientists predict that, as the climate continues to change, Hawaii will experience more of the consequences of altered weather patterns and higher sea levels.  This will impact Hawaii's land ecosystems, marine ecology, and coastal communities.
     The legislature also finds that the sea level has risen in Hawaii at a rate of approximately .06 inches per decade over the past century.  Worldwide, the rate of sea level rise has doubled since 1990.  Long term sea level rise has contributed to, and will continue to contribute to, ongoing coastal erosion, coastal flooding, and drainage problems.  The legislature further finds that waves, currents, and human activities are the principal cause of erosion, but sea level rise accelerates and expands erosion, impacting beaches that were once stable and affecting developed communities that rely on their beaches as a protective buffer from the sea.
     The legislature acknowledges research that finds that sea levels may rise one foot over their current level by 2050.  The legislature believes that it is critical for the State and counties to recognize this growing threat to the State's communities and begin to incorporate an imminent rise in sea level into plans for future development.  Thirteen other states, including California and Washington, have passed legislation to require planners to take sea level rise into account when planning for future development.  In addition, the Center for Island Climate Adaption and Policy at the University of Hawaii has strongly recommended that Hawaii follow their example by benchmarking future development to predicted sea level rise.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the state office of planning and the planning authority of each county to take into account a predicted sea level rise of one foot above current levels by 2050 when planning for development.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 46, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§46-     Sea level rise; planning.  The governing body or planning commission or department of each county shall take into account a predicted sea level rise of one foot above current sea level by 2050 when reviewing applications for building, zoning, and other development permits and when developing future county plans for building, zoning, permitting, and other development."
     SECTION 3.  Chapter 223, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§223-     Sea level rise; planning.  The office of planning shall develop a strategic plan for directing statewide growth that takes into account a predicted sea level rise of one foot above current sea level by 2050."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Climate Change; Sea Level Rise; Planning
 
Description:
Requires the state office of planning and county planning authorities to take into account a predicted sea level rise of 1 foot above current sea level by 2050 when permitting and planning for development.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
