HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2301
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRICULTURE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii is one of the most geographically isolated state in the country and is very dependent on food that is imported from other states and countries.  Approximately ninety-two per cent of our food is imported according to the United States Department of Agriculture.  Currently, Hawaii has a supply of fresh produce that could last for approximately ten days.  Ninety per cent of beef, sixty-five per cent of fresh fruits, and eighty per cent of all milk purchased in the State are imported.  In the event of a natural disaster, economic disruption, or other external events that are beyond the State's control, the residents of this State may be at risk of a food shortage because of the State's heavy reliance on imported foods.
     The legislature further finds that each food product that is imported into the State is a lost opportunity for local economic growth.  The University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources notes that an increase in the production and sale of Hawaii-grown agricultural commodities would create an increase in job opportunities, and that replacing approximately ten per cent of all imported foods with locally grown foods could create up to two thousand three hundred jobs.
     The legislature further finds that by establishing a food sustainability standard, the State will be able to ensure economic viability.  This standard will also help to create a framework for long-term land use planning, resource allocation, and tax incentives and will also direct the State's economy towards a more robust and sustainable future.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a food sustainability standard by increasing the production of locally grown foods that will lead to the diversification of the State's economy, create new job opportunities, advance long-term economic stability, and promote food security for the State.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
FOOD SUSTAINABILITY
     §   -1  Definitions.  As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
     "Department" means the department of agriculture.
     "Farm cash receipts" means the gross revenue of farms from the sale of Hawaii-grown products, including livestock, dairy, and edible crops, as determined by the department on an annual basis.
     "Food sustainability standard" means the volume of food commodities sold in the State, measured by farm cash receipts, or as otherwise determined by the department, that are grown in the State.
     §   -2   Department of agriculture duties.  (a)  The department shall be responsible for measuring and analyzing the amount of food livestock, dairy, and edible crop commodities grown and sold in the State on an annual basis.  This information shall be made publicly available in accordance with chapter 92F.
     (b)  The department, on an annual basis and in conjunction with the department of business, economic development, and tourism, shall identify key food commodities to be targeted for assistance for developing an increased local market share.
     (c)  The department shall be responsible for planning and adopting the necessary incentives to ensure that the food sustainability standard established in this chapter is met or exceeded.
     (d)  The department shall submit an annual report to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session, on the status and progress of the department's efforts to effectuate this chapter.  The annual report shall include any recommended policy changes or necessary legislation.
     (e)  The department may adopt rules as necessary, pursuant to chapter 91, to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
     §   -3   Food sustainability standard.  (a)  The department shall establish a statewide food sustainability standard, to be achieved by the year 2020, that requires the State to increase the production of food grown in the State for local consumption to no less than twice the amount of locally grown food in 2013; provided that the department shall measure this amount by the farm cash receipts for livestock, dairy, and crops without regard to any inflation adjustments, or by a comparable measurement as determined by the department.
     (b)  The department shall submit a report and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2020 regular session on how to raise the food sustainability standard over the next decade.
     §   -4   Prohibitions.  After December 31, 2019, if the department determines that a particular year did not achieve the food sustainability standard, notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no discretionary approvals shall be granted by the State, or any subdivision of the State, for a proposed reclassification of an agricultural or conservation district boundary of lands greater than twenty-five acres in size, until such time as the department determines that the food sustainability standard is achieved."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Food Sustainability; Department of Agriculture
 
Description:
Requires the DOA to develop a food sustainability standard to promote local food production.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
