HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2304
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO REAPPORTIONMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 25-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§25-1  Reapportionment commission.  A reapportionment commission shall be constituted before May 1 of each reapportionment year, and the members shall be appointed and certified to hold office until a general election is held under a reapportionment plan of the commission, or of a court of competent jurisdiction, or a new commission is constituted under Article IV, section 2 of the State Constitution, whichever event shall occur first.  Each member of the commission shall receive training regarding the provisions contained in chapter 92."
     SECTION 2.  Section 25-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§25-2  Duties.  (a)  Legislative reapportionment.  The commission shall reapportion the members of each house of the legislature on the basis, method, and criteria prescribed by the Constitution of the United States and article IV of the Hawaii Constitution.  Pursuant thereto, the commission shall conduct public hearings and consult with the apportionment advisory council of each basic island unit.  Not more than one hundred days from the date on which all members are certified, the commission shall cause to be given in each basic island unit, public notice of a legislative reapportionment plan prepared and proposed by the commission.  At least one public hearing on the proposed reapportionment plan shall be held in each basic island unit after initial public notice of the plan.  Each public hearing shall be broadcasted live and archived on the Internet for public access.  At least twenty days' notice shall be given of the public hearing.  The notice shall include a statement of the substance of the proposed reapportionment plan, and of the date, time, and place where interested persons may be heard thereon.  The notice shall be given at least once in the basic island unit where the hearing will be held.  All interested persons shall be afforded an opportunity to submit data, views, or arguments, orally or in writing, for consideration by the commission.  After the last of the public hearings, but in no event later than one hundred fifty days from the date on which all members of the commission are certified, the commission shall determine whether or not the plan is in need of correction or modification, make the correction or modification, if any, and file with the chief election officer, a final legislative reapportionment plan.  Within fourteen days after the filing of the final reapportionment plan, the chief election officer shall cause public notice to be given of the final legislative reapportionment plan which, upon public notice, shall become effective as of the date of filing and govern the election of members of the next five succeeding legislatures.
     (b)  Congressional reapportionment.  At times that may be required by the Constitution and that may be required by law of the United States, the commission shall redraw congressional district lines for the districts from which the members of the United States House of Representatives allocated to this State shall be elected.  The commission shall first determine the total number of members to which the State is entitled and shall then apportion those members among single member districts so that the average number of persons in the total population counted in the last preceding United States census per member in each district shall be as nearly equal as practicable.  In effecting the reapportionment and districting, the commission shall be guided by the following criteria:
     (1)  No district shall be drawn so as to unduly favor a person or political party;
     (2)  Except in the case of districts encompassing more than one island, districts shall be contiguous;
     (3)  Insofar as practicable, districts shall be compact;
     (4)  Where possible, district lines shall follow permanent and easily recognized features such as streets, streams, and clear geographical features, and when practicable, shall coincide with census tract boundaries;
     (5)  Where practicable, state legislative districts shall be wholly included within congressional districts; and
     (6)  Where practicable, submergence of an area in a larger district wherein substantially different socio-economic interests predominate shall be avoided.
     Not more than one hundred days from the date on which all members are certified, the commission shall cause public notice to be given of a congressional reapportionment plan prepared and proposed by the commission.  The commission shall conduct public hearings on the proposed plan in the manner prescribed under subsection (a).  At least one public hearing shall be held in each basic island unit after initial public notice of the plan.  Each public hearing shall be broadcasted live and archived on the Internet for public access.  After the last of the public hearings, but in no event later than one hundred fifty days from the date on which all members of the commission are certified, the commission shall determine whether or not the plan is in need of correction or modification, make the correction or modification, if any, and file with the chief election officer, a final congressional reapportionment plan.  Within fourteen days after filing of the final reapportionment plan, the chief election officer shall cause public notice to be given of the final congressional reapportionment plan which, upon public notice, shall become effective as of the date of filing and govern the election of members of the United States House of Representatives allocated to this State for the next five succeeding congresses."
     SECTION 3.  Section 25-7, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§25-7  Apportionment advisory councils.  The apportionment advisory councils for the respective basic island units shall be constituted at the same time as the reapportionment commission and the members shall be appointed to hold their offices for such term in the manner prescribed in Article IV of the Constitution.  Each advisory council shall serve in an advisory capacity to the reapportionment commission as to matters affecting its basic island unit.  Each member shall be a registered voter of the member's basic island unit[.] and receive training regarding the provisions contained in chapter 92.  A member of a council shall, for the period the member holds the member's office, receive compensation of $50 per meeting but not to exceed $500 per month and shall be allowed actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the member's duties.  Payments for compensation and expenses shall be made by warrants signed by the comptroller on vouchers properly endorsed by the chairperson of the appropriate advisory council.  The members of the council shall be exempt from the provisions of chapter 76.  Each council shall elect its own chairperson and may elect other officers as may be necessary to carry out its functions.  Meetings shall be called and held at the call of the chairperson or by a quorum which shall be a majority of the members."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Reapportionment Commission; Reapportionment Hearings; Sunshine Law; Public Internet Access
 
Description:
Requires members of the reapportionment commission and advisory councils to receive training on chapter 92.  Requires reapportionment public hearings to be broadcasted live and archived on the Internet.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
