HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2380
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SHIPPING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Shipping goods to Oahu from Molokai and Lanai requires routing the goods through Maui.  This route increases shipping times, which reduces the shelf life of fresh items, causes the goods to lose nutrients, increases spoilage, and promotes the growth of harmful bacteria.  In addition, the lack of an economically feasible transportation alternative places small businesses located on Molokai and Lanai at an economic disadvantage to other businesses with economical and direct shipping options.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a working group to examine economically feasible options to reduce the time necessary to ship goods from Molokai and Lanai to Oahu, including revising restrictions on shipping, the feasibility of a state barge company or other means of interisland shipping, reducing shipping taxes, and creating tax incentives.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established within the department of business, economic development, and tourism for administrative purposes, a working group to study and consider ways to reduce the time and cost of shipping goods to Oahu from Molokai and Lanai and to recommend solutions.
     (b)  The working group shall consider strategies for reducing shipping time and cost including:
     (1)  Amending any existing statute, administrative rule, or ordinance;
     (2)  The feasibility of a barge, ferry, or other means of shipping freight between islands;
     (3)  Reducing taxes;
     (4)  Creating tax incentives; and
     (5)  Any other issues the working group considers appropriate.
     (c)  The working group shall comprise the following members, or the respective designees:
     (1)  The director of business, economic development, and tourism;
     (2)  The director of transportation;
     (3)  The chairperson of the board of agriculture;
     (4)  One county official from the county of Maui, to be appointed by the mayor of the county of Maui;
     (5)  One county official from the city and county of Honolulu, to be appointed by the mayor of the city and county of Honolulu;
     (6)  A representative from the shipping industry, to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (7)  A representative from the airline industry, to be appointed by the president of the senate;
     (8)  The executive director of the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation;
     (9)  A member of the state house of representatives appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
    (10)  A member of the state senate appointed by the president of the senate; and
    (11)  Any additional members the chairperson of the working group determines to be necessary.
     (d)  The members of the working group shall designate a chairperson from among the members and shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of official duties.
     (e)  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall provide all administrative, technical, professional, and clerical support required by the working group for matters pertaining to this Act.
     (f)  The working group shall report to the legislature its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, no later than twenty days prior to the regular session of 2013.
     (g)  The working group shall cease to exist on June 30, 2013.
SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Working Group; Shipping; Molokai; Lanai; Oahu; Goods
 
Description:
Establishes a working group to explore options for reducing the shipping time and costs for transporting goods from Molokai and Lanai to Oahu.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
