HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2335
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE NATIVE HAWAIIAN ORGANIZATION NOTIFICATION LIST.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the Office of Hawaiian Relations within the Office of the Secretary, United States Department of the Interior, created the Native Hawaiian Organization Notification List in 2007 in order to:
     (1)  Assist the Department of the Interior and other agencies to locate, communicate, and consult with interested Native Hawaiian organizations per the statutory notification obligations under laws such as the National Environmental Policy Act, the National Historic Preservation Act, and the Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act or when otherwise desired; and
     (2)  Promote networking, articulation, and collaboration among all Native Hawaiian organizations.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the office of Hawaiian affairs to make accessible the federal Native Hawaiian Organizations Notification List to identify organizations to which state agencies may disseminate information, and with which state agencies may communicate regarding issues that may affect Native Hawaiians, including kuleana lands and curatorship.
     SECTION 2.  Section 10-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§10-3  Purpose of the office.  The purposes of the office of Hawaiian affairs include:
     (1)  The betterment of conditions of native Hawaiians.  A pro rata portion of all funds derived from the public land trust shall be funded in an amount to be determined by the legislature for this purpose, and shall be held and used solely as a public trust for the betterment of the conditions of native Hawaiians.  For the purpose of this chapter, the public land trust shall be all proceeds and income from the sale, lease, or other disposition of lands ceded to the United States by the Republic of Hawaii under the joint resolution of annexation, approved July 7, 1898 (30 Stat. 750), or acquired in exchange for lands so ceded, and conveyed to the State of Hawaii by virtue of section 5(b) of the Act of March 18, 1959 (73 Stat. 4, the Admissions Act), (excluding therefrom lands and all proceeds and income from the sale, lease, or disposition of lands defined as "available lands" by section 203 of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended), and all proceeds and income from the sale, lease, or other disposition of lands retained by the United States under sections 5(c) and 5(d) of the Act of March 18, 1959, later conveyed to the State under section 5(e);
     (2)  The betterment of conditions of Hawaiians;
     (3)  Serving as the principal public agency in this State responsible for the performance, development, and coordination of programs and activities relating to native Hawaiians and Hawaiians[;] including making the most recent version of the federal Native Hawaiian Organization Notification List available to state agencies and, upon request, other interested parties as a resource by which agencies may disseminate information and locate organizations to contact regarding issues such as kuleana lands and curatorship; except that the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, shall be administered by the Hawaiian homes commission;
     (4)  Assessing the policies and practices of other agencies impacting on native Hawaiians and Hawaiians, and conducting advocacy efforts for native Hawaiians and Hawaiians;
     (5)  Applying for, receiving, and disbursing, grants and donations from all sources for native Hawaiian and Hawaiian programs and services; and
     (6)  Serving as a receptacle for reparations."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Native Hawaiian Organization Notification List; Office of Hawaiian Affairs
 
Description:
Requires the office of Hawaiian affairs to make accessible a copy of the federal Native Hawaiian Organization Notification List so that it may serve as a resource by which state agencies and other interested parties may direct information dissemination and address topics including kuleana lands and curatorship.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
