HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2326
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TAXATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 235-12, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  For taxable years beginning after December 31, 1989, each individual or corporate resident taxpayer who files an individual or corporate net income tax return for a taxable year, may claim a tax credit under this section against the Hawaii state individual or corporate net income tax.  The tax credit may be claimed as follows:
     (1)  For wind energy systems that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, the credit shall be twenty per cent of the actual cost;
     (2)  For solar energy systems that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, on new and existing single family residential buildings, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed thirty-five per cent or $1,750, whichever is less, of the actual cost of the solar energy system;
     (3)  For solar energy systems that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, on new and existing multiunit buildings used primarily for residential purposes, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed thirty-five per cent or $350 per building unit, whichever is less, of the actual cost of the solar energy system;
     (4)  For solar energy systems that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, in new and existing hotel, commercial, and industrial facilities, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed thirty-five per cent of the actual cost of the solar energy system;
     (5)  For heat pumps that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, in new and existing single-family residential buildings, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed twenty per cent or $400, whichever is less, of the actual cost of the heat pump;
     (6)  For heat pumps that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, in new and existing multiunit buildings used primarily for residential purposes, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed twenty per cent or $200 per building unit, whichever is less, of the actual cost of the heat pump; provided that a licensed professional engineer reviews the design of the system and provides a written opinion that the system, in accordance with recognized engineering practice, is designed to provide not less than ninety per cent of the daily annual average hot water needs of all of the occupants of the building;
     (7)  For heat pumps that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1989, but before July 1, 2003, in new and existing hotel, commercial, and industrial facilities, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed twenty per cent of the actual cost of the heat pump; and
     (8)  For ice storage systems that are installed and placed in service after December 31, 1990, but before July 1, 2003, the credit shall be in an amount not to exceed fifty per cent of the actual cost of the ice storage system.
The per unit of actual cost of a solar energy system or heat pump referred to in subsection (b)(3) and (6) shall be determined by multiplying the actual cost of the solar energy system or heat pump installed and placed in service in the multiunit building by a fraction, the numerator being the total square feet of that unit in the multiunit building, and the denominator being the total square feet of all the units in the multiunit building.
     If federal energy tax credits similar to any of those provided in paragraphs (1) to (8) are established after June 30, 1998, but before July 1, 2003, then the state tax credit provided in the respective paragraph or paragraphs shall be reduced by the amount of the applicable federal energy tax credit.
     The basis of eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed."
     SECTION 2.  Section 235-12.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  When the requirements of subsection (d) are met, each individual or corporate taxpayer that files an individual or corporate net income tax return for a taxable year may claim a tax credit under this section against the Hawaii state individual or corporate net income tax.  The tax credit may be claimed for every eligible renewable energy technology system that is installed and placed in service in the State by a taxpayer during the taxable year.  The tax credit may be claimed as follows:
     (1)  For each solar energy system:  thirty-five per cent of the actual cost or the cap amount determined in subsection (b), whichever is less; or
     (2)  For each wind-powered energy system:  twenty per cent of the actual cost or the cap amount determined in subsection (b), whichever is less;
provided that multiple owners of a single system shall be entitled to a single tax credit; and provided further that the tax credit shall be apportioned between the owners in proportion to their contribution to the cost of the system.
     In the case of a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust, the tax credit allowable is for every eligible renewable energy technology system that is installed and placed in service in the State by the entity.  The cost upon which the tax credit is computed shall be determined at the entity level.  Distribution and share of credit shall be determined pursuant to section 235-110.7(a).
     The basis of eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed."
     SECTION 3.  Section 235-110.3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Each year during the credit period, there shall be allowed to each taxpayer subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter, an ethanol facility tax credit that shall be applied to the taxpayer's net income tax liability, if any, imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which the credit is properly claimed.
     For each qualified ethanol production facility, the annual dollar amount of the ethanol facility tax credit during the eight-year period shall be equal to thirty per cent of its nameplate capacity if the nameplate capacity is greater than five hundred thousand but less than fifteen million gallons.  A taxpayer may claim this credit for each qualifying ethanol facility; provided that:
     (1)  The claim for this credit by any taxpayer of a qualifying ethanol production facility shall not exceed one hundred per cent of the total of all investments made by the taxpayer in the qualifying ethanol production facility during the credit period;
     (2)  The qualifying ethanol production facility operated at a level of production of at least seventy-five per cent of its nameplate capacity on an annualized basis;
     (3)  The qualifying ethanol production facility is in production on or before January 1, 2017; [and]
     (4)  No taxpayer that claims the credit under this section shall claim any other tax credit under this chapter for the same taxable year[.]; and
     (5)  The basis of eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed."
     SECTION 4.  Section 235-110.46, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  The tax credit earned shall be equal to the qualified costs incurred from June 1, 2003, through May 31, 2009, up to a maximum of $75,000,000 of credits in the aggregate for all qualified taxpayers for all years; provided that notwithstanding the amount of tax credits earned in any year, a maximum of $7,500,000 of tax credits in the aggregate for all qualified taxpayers may be used in any one taxable year.  The credits over $7,500,000 shall be used as provided in subsection (d).  In the case of a partnership, limited liability company, S corporation, estate, trust, or association of apartment owners, the tax credit allowable is for qualified costs incurred by the entity.  The costs upon which the tax credit is computed shall be determined at the entity level.
     The basis of eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed."
     SECTION 5.  Section 235-110.7, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There shall be allowed to each taxpayer subject to the tax imposed by this chapter a capital goods excise tax credit which shall be deductible from the taxpayer's net income tax liability, if any, imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which the credit is properly claimed.
     The amount of the tax credit shall be determined by the application of the following rates against the cost of the eligible depreciable tangible personal property used by the taxpayer in a trade or business and placed in service within Hawaii after December 31, 1987.  For calendar years beginning after:
     (1)  December 31, 1987, the applicable rate shall be three per cent;
     (2)  December 31, 1988, the applicable rate shall be four per cent;
     (3)  December 31, 2008, the applicable rate shall be zero per cent; and
     (4)  December 31, 2009, and thereafter, the applicable rate shall be four per cent.
     For taxpayers with fiscal taxable years, the applicable rate shall be the rate for the calendar year in which the eligible depreciable tangible personal property used in the trade or business is placed in service within Hawaii.
     In the case of a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust, the tax credit allowable is for eligible depreciable tangible personal property which is placed in service by the entity.  The cost upon which the tax credit is computed shall be determined at the entity level.  Distribution and share of credit shall be determined by rules.
     In the case of eligible depreciable tangible personal property for which a credit for sales or use taxes paid to another state is allowable under section 238-3(i), the amount of the tax credit allowed under this section shall not exceed the amount of use tax actually paid under chapter 238 relating to such tangible personal property.
     If a deduction is taken under section 179 (with respect to election to expense certain depreciable business assets) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, no tax credit shall be allowed for that portion of the cost of property for which the deduction was taken.
     The basis of eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed."
     SECTION 6.  Section 235-110.8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (h) to read as follows:
     "(h)  The credit allowed under this section shall be claimed against net income tax liability for the taxable year.  For the purpose of deducting this tax credit, net income tax liability means net income tax liability reduced by all other credits allowed the taxpayer under this chapter.
     A tax credit under this section that exceeds the taxpayer's income tax liability may be used as a credit against the taxpayer's income tax liability in subsequent years until exhausted.  All claims for a tax credit under this section shall be filed on or before the end of the twelfth month following the close of the taxable year for which the credit may be claimed.  Failure to properly and timely claim the credit shall constitute a waiver of the right to claim the credit.  A taxpayer may claim a credit under this section only if the building or project is a qualified low-income housing building or a qualified low-income housing project under section 42 of the Internal Revenue Code.
     Section 469 (with respect to passive activity losses and credits limited) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be applied in claiming the credit under this section.
     The basis of eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed."
     SECTION 7.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 8.  This Act, upon its approval, shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Income Tax Credits; Depreciation
 
Description:
Amends various income tax credits to provide that the basis of eligible depreciable property for state income tax purposes shall be reduced by the amount of the tax credit claimed.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
