HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2377
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO RENEWABLE ENERGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature is in support of renewable energy programs to reduce dependence on imported fossil fuels and to promote the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, while also increasing energy security by minimizing the impacts of supply disruptions and pricing volatility.
     The legislature finds that the high initial cost of purchasing renewable energy systems is a barrier to the installation and utilization of these types of technologies.  The legislature also finds that the renewable energy income tax credit, the high cost of electricity, and other market-based incentives may not be sufficient to encourage, in particular, the use of hydrokinetic energy systems throughout Hawaii.
     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to encourage and authorize the public utilities commission to establish a ratepayer-funded hydrokinetic energy rebate program to promote the use of this renewable energy technology to utility customers within electric utility service areas, if the public utilities commission determines after an assessment of the costs and benefits of such a program that it is in the public interest to establish such a program.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 269, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§269-     Hydrokinetic energy rebate program; establishment.  (a)  The public utilities commission may establish a ratepayer-funded hydrokinetic energy rebate program upon evaluating the costs and benefits of a rebate program and determining that a rebate program is in the public interest.
     (b)  To qualify for the hydrokinetic rebate program, applicants shall comply with requirements and conditions established by the public utilities commission.
     (c)  Rebate amounts and other program specifications for the hydrokinetic rebate program shall be established by the public utilities commission; provided that the total amount of rebates approved by the public utilities commission under this section shall not exceed $          , in the aggregate.
     (d)  The public utilities commission shall effectuate the purposes of this section by rules adopted pursuant to chapter 91 or order.
     (e)  The public utilities commission may delegate the administration of the hydrokinetic energy rebate program to the public benefits fund administrator established pursuant to section 269-122.
     (f)  For the purposes of this section, "hydrokinetic energy" means energy derived from:
     (1)  Waves, tides, and currents in oceans, estuaries, and tidal areas;
     (2)  Free flowing water in rivers, lakes, and streams;
     (3)  Free flowing water in an irrigation system, canal, or other man-made channel, including projects that utilize non-mechanical structures to accelerate the flow of water for electric power production purposes; or
     (4)  Differentials in ocean temperature.
     Hydrokinetic energy shall not include any energy that is derived from any source that utilizes a dam, diversionary structure except as provided in paragraph (3), or impoundment for electric power production purposes."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hydrokinetic Energy Rebate Program; Renewable Energy
 
Description:
Authorizes the public utilities commission to establish a ratepayer-funded hydrokinetic energy rebate program.
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
