HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
233
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EMERGENCY RESPONSE VEHICLES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Findings and purpose.  (a)  The legislature finds that a review of procedures for emergency response vehicles is timely.  Specifically, questions have been raised about:
     (1)  Whether motorists can hear emergency response vehicle sirens;
     (2)  Whether motorists can see emergency response vehicle flashing lights;
     (3)  Whether motorists give low priority to emergency response vehicles or ignore them;
     (4)  Whether lights and sirens work effectively as warning devices;
     (5)  Whether travelling with lights and sirens quickens emergency response and transport times;
     (6)  Whether the use of emergency lights and sirens saves significant time;
     (7)  Whether the use of lights and/or sirens is necessary for non-time-sensitive responses;
     (8)  Whether driving an emergency response vehicle with lights and sirens is riskier than driving without lights and sirens;
     (9)  Whether, by correctly using emergency response and dispatch protocols at the time of 911 calls, the small population of time-critical patients or victims can be identified to justify the use of lights and sirens;
    (10)  Whether there has ever been a lawsuit filed in the United States or Canada complaining that an emergency response vehicle inappropriately responded without using lights and sirens;
    (11)  Whether the public expects the use of lights and sirens on emergency response vehicles; and
    (12)  Whether it is common for a caller to ask for a response without using lights or sirens.
     (b)  In 1994, the National Association of Emergency Medical Services Physicians, together with the National Association of State Emergency Medical Services Directors, published official practice-setting recommendations as follows:
     (1)  Emergency medical services medical directors should participate directly in the development of policies governing emergency medical-vehicle response, patient transport, and the use of warning lights and sirens mode;
     (2)  The use of lights and sirens during an emergency response and during patient transport should be based on standardized protocols that take into account situational and patient problem assessments;
     (3)  Emergency medical services agencies should use an emergency medical-dispatch priority reference system that has been developed in conjunction with and approved by the emergency medical services medical director to determine which requests for prehospital medical care require the use of warning lights and sirens mode;
     (4)  Except for suspected life-threatening, time-critical cases or cases involving multiple patients, lights and sirens response by more than one emergency medical vehicle usually is unnecessary;
     (5)  The use of emergency warning lights and sirens should be limited to emergency responses and emergency-transport situations only; and
     (6)  Scientific studies evaluating the effectiveness of warning lights and sirens under specific situations should be conducted and validated.
     (c)  The purpose of this Act is to establish a temporary task force to determine, when an emergency response vehicle responds to a call in the State, the:
     (1)  Impact of the use of emergency response vehicle sirens in terms of noise and whether the use of sirens enhances the safety of first responders and the public; and
     (2)  Relative effectiveness of the use of lights rather than sirens at night.
     SECTION 2.  Temporary task force; duty; composition; no compensation; report; termination.  (a)  There is created a temporary emergency response vehicle noise task force within the department of health to examine the issue of the use of lights and sirens on emergency response vehicles.  The task force shall specifically determine the:
     (1)  Impact of the use of emergency response vehicle sirens in terms of noise and whether the use of sirens enhances the safety of first responders and the public; and
     (2)  Relative effectiveness of the use of lights rather than sirens at night,
when an emergency response vehicle responds to a call in the State.
     (b)  The temporary task force shall consist of:
     (1)  Two members of the house of representatives to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (2)  Two members of the senate to be appointed by the president of the senate;
     (3)  One member representing the department of health, emergency medical services and injury prevention system branch;
     (4)  One member representing the state emergency medical services advisory committee;
     (5)  One member representing the department of transportation;
     (6)  One member representing the department of public safety;
     (7)  Four members, one each representing each of the mayors of the four counties;
     (8)  Four members, one each representing each of the police departments of the four counties;
     (9)  Four members, one each representing each of the fire departments of the four counties; and
    (10)  Two members representing emergency medical service personnel.
     (c)  Members shall not be compensated but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred, including travel expenses, in carrying out their duties.  The department of health shall provide all necessary administrative, professional, technical, and clerical support required by the task force.
     (d)  The task force shall submit a written report of findings and recommendations, including any necessary proposed state and county legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (e)  The task force shall terminate on June 30, 2012.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Emergency Response Vehicle Noise Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes a temporary emergency vehicle noise task force to determine the impact of the use of emergency vehicle sirens in terms of excessive noise and their effect on public safety and the relative effectiveness of the use of emergency lights rather than sirens at night.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
