HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2341
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FINANCING AGREEMENTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 37D-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§37D-2  Financing agreements.  (a)  There is hereby established and authorized the financing agreement program of the State.  Any agency desiring to acquire or improve projects through the financing agreement program established and authorized by this chapter shall submit a written request to the department providing any information that the department shall require.  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, and except for the Hawaii health systems corporation and its regional system boards, only with the approval by the attorney general as to form and legality and upon the written request of one or more agencies may the department enter into a financing agreement in accordance with this chapter, and only with the approval by the attorney general as to form and legality, and by the director as to fiscal responsibility, and upon the written request of an agency, the agency may enter into a financing agreement in accordance with this chapter, except that the department of education may enter into a financing agreement in accordance with section 36-32 with the concurrence of the director and with the approval of the attorney general as to form and legality; and that the board of regents of the University of Hawaii may enter into a financing agreement in accordance with this chapter without the approval of the director and of the attorney general as to form and legality if the principal amount of the financing agreement does not exceed $3,000,000.  A financing agreement may be entered into by the department on behalf of one or more agencies, or by an agency, at any time (before or after commencement or completion of any improvements or acquisitions to be financed) and shall be upon terms and conditions the department finds to be advantageous.  In each case of a written request by the judiciary to participate in the financing agreement program, the department shall implement the request; provided that the related financing agreement shall be upon terms and conditions the department finds to be advantageous.  Any financing agreement entered into by the department without the approval, or by an agency without the approvals required by this section shall be void and of no effect.  A single financing agreement entered into by the department may finance a single item or multiple items of property to be used by multiple agencies or may finance a single item or multiple items of property to be used by a single agency.  If the financing agreement is by the department, the department shall bill any agency that benefits from property acquired with the proceeds of a financing agreement for the agency's pro rata share of:
     (1)  The department's costs of administration of the financing agreement program; and
     (2)  The financing costs, including the principal and interest components of the financing agreement and insurance premiums,
on a monthly or other periodic basis, and may deposit payments received in connection with the billings with a trustee as security for the financing agreement.  Any agency receiving such a bill shall be authorized and shall pay the amounts billed from available moneys.
     If a financing agreement is by an agency, the agency shall deposit on a monthly or other periodic basis with the department, payments from available moneys with respect to the agency's financing costs, including the principal and interest components of the financing agreement and insurance premiums, which payments the department may deposit with a trustee as security for the financing agreement.  The department may bill an agency for the department's costs of administering the agency's payments and the agency receiving such a bill shall be authorized to and shall pay the amounts billed from available moneys.
     (b)  Financing agreements shall be subject to the following limitations:
     (1)  Amounts payable by an agency to or upon the direction of the department in respect to a project and by the department or an agency under a financing agreement shall be limited to available moneys.  In no circumstance shall the department or an agency be obligated to pay amounts due under a financing agreement from any source other than available moneys.  If, by reason of insufficient available moneys or other reason, amounts due under a financing agreement are not paid when due, the lender may exercise any property right that the department or the agency has granted to it in the financing agreement, against the property that was purchased with the proceeds of the financing agreement, and apply the amounts so received toward payments scheduled to be made by the department or the agency under the financing agreement;
     (2)  No property rights may be granted in property unless the property is being acquired, is to be substantially improved, is to be refinanced with the proceeds of a financing agreement, or is land on which the property is located;
     (3)  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, and except for the Hawaii health systems corporation and its regional system boards, and as otherwise provided in this section with respect to the department of education and the University of Hawaii, and except as provided in chapter 323F as to the Hawaii health systems corporation and its regional system boards, an agency shall not have the power to enter into a financing agreement, except as authorized by this chapter, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the sale, lease, or other disposition of property owned by an agency;
     (4)  Except as otherwise provided in this section with respect to the department of education and the University of Hawaii, the sale, assignment, or other disposition of any financing agreements, including certificates of participation relating thereto, shall require the approval of the director; and
     (5)  The department or the agency proposing to enter into a financing agreement shall not be subject to chapter 103D and any and all other requirements of law for competitive bidding for financing agreements.
     (c)  The issuance of certificates of participation shall not require legislative approval."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Certificates of Participation; Legislative Approval
 
Description:
Specifies that the issuance of certificates of participation does not require legislative approval.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
