HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2363
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN AGRIBUSINESS COOPERATIVE PROGRAM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that local farmers have difficulty distributing their products to large retail establishments.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of agriculture to convene a task force to conduct a study on whether an agribusiness cooperative program should be established.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of agriculture shall convene a task force to conduct a study on whether an agribusiness cooperative program that includes the following functions should be established to promote the distribution of local farm products to large retailers:
     (1)  Assist local farmers in increasing the distribution of products to large retail establishments; and
     (2)  Develop feed mills located in this State to lower farm expenses and minimize the carbon impact of transporting feed imports to local farmers.
The study shall include a proposal for the means by which the agribusiness cooperative program may be permanently funded through private and public funds and a recommendation for the appropriate state agency or department under which the program should be established.
     (b)  To conduct the study, the agribusiness cooperative program task force shall be composed of:
     (1)  The chairperson of the board of agriculture, or chairperson's designee;
     (2)  Two representatives of the Hawaii Farmers Union, as designated by the president of the Hawaii Farmers Union;
     (3)  A professor of agricultural economics at the University of Hawaii at Hilo, to be designated by the chancellor of the University of Hawaii at Hilo;
     (4)  A representative of the extension agent program of the University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources, to be designated by the dean of the University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources;
     (5)  The chief executive officer of the Hawaii Food Industry Association;
     (6)  The president of the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation, or the president's designee;
     (7)  The president of the Hawaii Cattlemen's Council, Inc., or the president's designee;
     (8)  The director of the Hawaii Pacific University-affiliated Oceanic Institute Aquatic Feeds and Nutrition Department; and
     (9)  A professor of animal sciences at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, to be designated by the dean of the University of Hawaii college of tropical agriculture and human resources.
     (c)  As used in this section:
     "Large retail establishment" refers to warehouse clubs and stores, big box retail facilities, and other large supermarkets that sell produce, poultry, or meats.  In general, large retail establishments range in size from 20,000 square feet to 200,000 square feet.
     "Local farmer" refers to a farmer whose farm is located in Hawaii.
     SECTION 3.  The task force shall report its findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agribusiness Cooperative Program; Task Force
 
Description:
Requires the convening of a task force to conduct a study as to whether an agribusiness cooperative program should be established in Hawaii.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
