HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2357
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ARTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to allow a percentage of the revenue in the works of art special fund to be expended for performing arts.
     SECTION 2.  Section 103-8.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§103-8.5  Works of art special fund.  (a)  There is created a works of art special fund, into which shall be transferred one per cent of all state fund appropriations for capital improvements designated for the construction cost element; provided that this transfer shall apply only to capital improvement appropriations that are designated for the construction or renovation of state buildings.  The one per cent transfer requirement shall not apply to appropriations from the passenger facility charge special fund established by section 261-5.5 and the rental motor vehicle customer facility charge special fund established under section 261-5.6.
     (b)  The works of art special fund shall be used solely for the following purposes:
     (1)  Costs related to the acquisition or presentation of works of art, including any consultant or staff services required to carry out the art in public places and relocatable works of art programs;
     (2)  Site modifications, display, and interpretive work necessary for the exhibition of works of art;
     (3)  Upkeep services, including maintenance, repair, and restoration of works of art; and
     (4)  Storing and transporting works of art[.];
provided that fifty per cent of the works of art special fund may be used for the presentation of performing arts and their related costs.
     (c)  The one per cent amount, which is included in all capital improvement appropriations, shall be calculated at the time the appropriation bills are signed into law.  The moneys shall be transferred into the works of art special fund upon availability of moneys from the appropriations.  Each agency receiving capital improvement appropriations shall calculate the one per cent amount and transfer the moneys into the works of art special fund.
     (d)  The comptroller and the state foundation on culture and the arts shall decide on the specific works of art [objects] to acquire[,] or present, giving first consideration to placing or presenting appropriate [pieces] works of art at the locations of the original appropriation.
     The selection of, commissioning artists for, reviewing of design, execution, and placement of, and the acceptance of works of art shall be the responsibility of the comptroller and the state foundation on culture and the arts in consultation with the affected agency or department.
     Expenditures from the works of art special fund shall be made by the comptroller.
     (e)  The comptroller shall:
     (1)  Provide each agency receiving capital improvement appropriations with information regarding items that shall be included and excluded from the one per cent amount;
     (2)  Ensure that each agency calculates its one per cent amount correctly; and
     (3)  Ensure that each agency transfers the correct amount to the works of art special fund in a timely manner.
     (f)  The comptroller and the executive director shall track amounts due from each agency under the one per cent requirement as provided in this section.
     (g)  For the purposes of this section, "performing arts" means dance, drama, music, and other forms of artistic expression that are performed before an audience."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Works of Art Special Fund; Expenditures
 
Description:
Allows fifty per cent of the works of art special fund to be used for performing arts and their related costs.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
