HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2300
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 26-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§26-17  Department of Hawaiian home lands.  (a)  The department of Hawaiian home lands shall be headed by an executive board to be known as the Hawaiian homes commission.
     (b)  The commission shall be composed of nine members.  The appointment, tenure, and removal of the members and the filling of vacancies on the commission shall be in accordance with section 26-34 and section 202(a) of the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act of 1920, as amended.  The governor shall appoint the chairperson of the commission from among the members thereof.
     (c)  The commission may delegate to the chairperson [such] the duties, powers, and authority, or so much thereof as may be lawful or proper, for the performance of the functions vested in the commission.
     (d)  The chairperson of the board shall serve in a full-time capacity and shall perform [such] the duties, and exercise [such] the powers and authority, or so much thereof as may be delegated to the chairperson by the board.
     (e)  The department shall administer the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act of 1920 as set forth in the Constitution of the State and by law.
     [The functions and authority heretofore exercised by the Hawaiian homes commission as heretofore constituted are transferred to the department of Hawaiian home lands established by this chapter.]
     (f)  Five per cent of the annual revenue from the public land trust that is allocated to the State shall be appropriated annually to the department.
     (g)  For purposes of this section:
     "Public land trust" means that public land trust established in section 5(f) of the Admission Act.
     "Revenue" means all proceeds, fees, charges, rents, or other income, or any portion thereof, derived from any sale, lease, license, permit, or other similar proprietary disposition, permitted use, or activity that is situated upon and results from the actual use of lands comprising the public land trust, and including any penalties or levies exacted as a result of a violation of the terms of any proprietary disposition, but excluding any income, proceeds, fees, charges, or other moneys derived through the exercise of sovereign functions and powers including:
     (1)  Taxes;
     (2)  Regulatory or licensing fees;
     (3)  Fines, penalties, or levies;
     (4)  Registration fees;
     (5)  Moneys received by any public educational institution, including the University of Hawaii and the community college system, from its educational programs and ancillary services, such as tuition, registration fees, meals, books, grants, or scholarships;
     (6)  Interagency and intra-agency administrative fees or assessments;
     (7)  Moneys derived from or provided in support of penal institutions and programs;
     (8)  Grants, carry-overs, and pass-throughs;
     (9)  Federal moneys, including federal-aid, grants, subsidies, and contracts;
    (10)  Moneys collected from the sale or dissemination of government publications; and
    (11)  Department of defense proceeds on state-improved lands."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
     INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
DHHL; Public Land Trust Revenues
 
Description:
Requires 5% of the State's annual share of the revenues from the public land trust to be annually appropriated to DHHL.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
