HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2411
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to appropriate moneys to accelerate the commencement of capital improvements construction.  The legislature finds that this Act is necessary to promote economic recovery and job creation.  The legislature further finds that the appropriations made by this Act are reasonable for the short term and reflective of an immediate higher priority need of the State.
     SECTION 2.  The director of finance is authorized to issue general obligation bonds in the sum of $2,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary is appropriated for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the planning and design of future construction projects and to expedite the planning and implementation of construction projects.
     The appropriation made for the capital improvement projects authorized by this section shall not lapse at the end of the fiscal biennium for which the appropriation is made; provided that all moneys from the appropriation unencumbered as of June 30, 2014, shall lapse as of that date.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of accounting and general services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  The director of finance is authorized to issue general obligation bonds in the sum of $2,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary is appropriated for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the planning and design of future construction projects and to expedite the planning and implementation of construction projects.
     The appropriation made for the capital improvement projects authorized by this section shall not lapse at the end of the fiscal biennium for which the appropriation is made; provided that all moneys from the appropriation unencumbered as of June 30, 2014, shall lapse as of that date.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the special funds of the University of Hawaii the sum of $1,500,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the planning and design of future construction projects and to expedite the planning and implementation of construction projects.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the University of Hawaii for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the highway special fund the sum of $2,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the planning and design of future construction projects and to expedite the planning and implementation of construction projects.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the highways division of the department of transportation for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 6.  There is appropriated out of the airport revenue fund the sum of $2,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the planning and design of future construction projects and to expedite the planning and implementation of construction projects.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the airports division of the department of transportation for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 7.  There is appropriated out of the harbor special fund the sum of $2,000,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the planning and design of future construction projects and to expedite the planning and implementation of construction projects.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the harbors division of the department of transportation for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 8.  Each department to which an appropriation is made pursuant to this Act shall report to the legislature on each project for which plans and designs were procured using the appropriated moneys no later than sixty days following the contract award for the project.
     SECTION 9.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Capital Improvements; Appropriations
 
Description:
Makes appropriations from general obligation bonds and certain special funds for the planning and design of future construction projects.  Effective 07/01/2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
