HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2421
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FEED MILLS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that feed accounts for up to seventy per cent of livestock production costs.  In Hawaii, all feed is imported.  High feed prices and rising transportation costs have caused the animal agriculture industry in Hawaii to shrink by over fifty per cent in the past ten years.
     The legislature further finds that a feed mill would facilitate the development of local feed production to stabilize and expand the animal agriculture industry in Hawaii.  The feed mill would verify what local products from the agricultural, fishery, and bio-energy sectors can be used as ingredients in feed, and showcase Hawaii as a leader in sustainable agriculture development.
     The legislature also finds that mills can only be used for either production or experimental purposes.  Consequently, all of the mills in the western United States are used for production and there are no experimental mills.  Having an experimental mill in Hawaii would generate income and jobs by attracting companies from around the country to test their feed in the State.
     The legislature also finds that locally produced feed would ensure that feed prices are controlled by internal market forces and guarantee the supply and quality of feed for Hawaii's livestock, resulting in the potential export of Hawaii branded ingredients, feed, and specialty products.  Locally produced feed will also promote sustainability through the use of by-, co-, and waste-products from other industry sectors.
     The legislature finds that a feed mill would allow Hawaii to reduce its dependence on imported feed and animal food products, generate income, add value to other industry sectors, create jobs, and reduce environmental waste, leading to a more sustainable and independent Hawaii economy.
     The purpose of this Act is to award a grant to the Oceanic Institute for the construction of the feed research and pilot production facility.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $450,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to the Oceanic Institute for the construction of the feeds research and pilot production facility; provided that no funds shall be released pursuant to this Act unless matched by private funds.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  The Oceanic Institute shall prepare a report to the legislature on the progress of the feeds research and pilot production facility project, including any contracts with potential purchasers of the feed produced at the facility.  The Oceanic Institute shall submit the report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Oceanic Institute; Feed Mill; Grant; Appropriation; Project
 
Description:
Awards a grant to the Oceanic Institute for the construction of the feeds research and pilot production facility.  Requires the Oceanic Institute to report to the legislature on the progress of the project.  Appropriation.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
