HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2441
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 576D-16, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Beginning October 1, 1998, each employer in the State shall report to the agency within twenty days of hire the name, address, [and] social security number, and the date services for remuneration were first performed of each new employee along with the name, federal identification number, and address of the employer.  Each report shall be made on a W-4 form or its equivalent, and may be transmitted by first class mail, magnetically, or electronically.  If an employer is transmitting reports to the agency magnetically or electronically, the report shall be transmitted twice monthly not less than twelve days nor more than sixteen days apart.  The agency shall maintain these reports as the state directory of new hires."
     SECTION 2.  Section 576E-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  Upon receipt of the copy of the notice, or upon request of the responsible parent pursuant to the order, the employer or union shall transfer the notice to the appropriate plan providing health care coverage for which the child is eligible within twenty business days after the date of the notice or enroll the dependent child as a beneficiary in the group medical insurance plan and withhold any required premium from the responsible parent's income.  If more than one plan is offered by the employer or union, the child shall be enrolled in the plan in which the responsible parent is enrolled or the least costly plan otherwise available to the responsible parent that is comparable to the plan in which the responsible parent is enrolled.  An employer who has received a copy of the notice shall inform the agency when the employment of the responsible parent is terminated."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
 
BY REQUEST
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Child Support Enforcement
 
Description:
Includes the date that services for remuneration were first performed as information to be provided to the Child Support Enforcement Agency through the new hire reporting process.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
