HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2416
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the education of Hawaii's students is imperative not only for each student's future success, but for the overall strength of Hawaii's economy and communities.  However, a student's education suffers if that student does not attend school each day.  Some schools in the State report more than fifteen per cent of students in the school miss fifteen or more school days in a year.
     The legislature further finds that there are many reasons a student may miss school, including sickness, the care of a sibling or parent, or the assumption that school simply isn't important.  In order to develop comprehensive solutions that address the underlying causes of school absenteeism, it is important to consider the issue from a broad perspective and within an appropriate context.
     The purpose of this Act, therefore, is to establish a school attendance working group that brings together knowledge from several government agencies and community organizations to address this growing concern.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of education shall establish a school attendance working group to consist of the following members:
     (1)  The chair of the board of education or the chair's designee;
     (2)  The superintendent of education or the superintendent's designee;
     (3)  The presiding judge of the family court of the first circuit or the presiding judge's designee;
     (4)  The chief of police of the Honolulu police department or the chief's designee;
     (5)  A county prosecutor, to be appointed by the governor;
     (6)  A high school principal, to be appointed by the superintendent of education;
     (7)  A department of education counselor, to be appointed by the superintendent of education;
     (8)  A high school student, to be appointed by the superintendent of education;
     (9)  A public member with relevant expertise to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives; and
    (10)  A public member with relevant expertise to be appointed by the president of the senate.
     (b)  The working group established in subsection (a) shall:
     (1)  Collect attendance data from each school;
     (2)  Collect truancy data from law enforcement and the judiciary;
     (3)  Discover and analyze causes for absenteeism among K-12 students;
     (4)  Devise policies to address:
         (A)  Student attendance tracking;
         (B)  Parental notification;
         (C)  Chronic absenteeism; and
         (D)  Truancy; and 
     (5)  Make recommendations to the board of education, department of education, governor, and legislature regarding policies and actions to increase student attendance and reduce high absentee rates.
     (c)  Members of the working group shall not be entitled to compensation but shall be reimbursed for necessary travel expenses incurred in the performance of their duties on the working group.
     (d)  No member shall be made subject to chapter 84, Hawaii Revised Statutes, solely because of that member's participation as a member of the working group.
     (e)  The working group shall submit a report of its findings, including any recommendations for legislation, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $5,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the working group to accomplish the purposes of this Act.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
School Absenteeism; Working Group; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a School Attendance Working Group within the Department of Education to address issues surrounding high absentee rates in K-12 schools.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
