HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2479
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CREATIVE MEDIA DEVELOPMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the film, television, and digital media industries in Hawaii are important components of a diversified economy and that their financial impact can be strengthened significantly if existing incentives for the industries are adjusted.
     The legislature also finds that nearly every country and state has implemented tax incentives to attract film, television, and digital media productions.  These jurisdictions have experienced dramatic increases in in-state spending and significant growth in workforce and infrastructure development.  More productions in Hawaii would stimulate more direct and indirect tax revenue.
     The legislature further finds that it is desirable to provide incentives to the film, television, and digital media industries to encourage similar dramatic growth in Hawaii because the film, television, and digital media industries:
      1)  Infuse significant amounts of new money into the economy, which are dispersed across many communities and businesses and which benefit a wide array of residents;
     (2)  Create skilled, high-paying jobs;
     (3)  Have a natural dynamic synergy with Hawaii's top industry (tourism) and are used as a destination marketing tool for the visitor industry; and
     (4)  Are clean, nonpolluting industries that value the natural beauty of Hawaii and its diverse multicultural population and wide array of architecture.
     The purpose of this Act is to continue to encourage the film, television, and digital media industries, to allow Hawaii to compete with other film production centers in attracting a greater number of significant projects to the islands, and to continue to build the State's local film, television, and digital media industries.  The purpose of this Act is also to encourage the growth of the film, television, and digital media industries by providing enhanced incentives to attract more film, television, and digital media productions to Hawaii, thereby generating increased tax revenues.
     SECTION 2.  Section 235-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§235-17  Motion picture, digital media, [and] television, film, and animation or special and visual effects production income tax credit.  (a)  Any law to the contrary notwithstanding, there shall be allowed to each taxpayer subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter, an income tax credit which shall be deductible from the taxpayer's net income tax liability, if any, imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which the credit is properly claimed.  The amount of the credit shall be:
    (l)   Fifteen per cent of the qualified production costs incurred by a qualified production in any county of the State with a population of over seven hundred thousand; or
     (2)  Twenty per cent of the qualified production costs incurred by a qualified production in any county of the State with a population of seven hundred thousand or less.
A qualified production occurring in more than one county may prorate its expenditures based upon the amounts spent in each county, if the population bases differ enough to change the percentage of tax credit.
     In the case of a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust, the tax credit allowable is for qualified production costs incurred by the entity for the taxable year.  The cost upon which the tax credit is computed shall be determined at the entity level.  Distribution and share of credit shall be determined by rule.
     If a deduction is taken under section 179 (with respect to election to expense depreciable business assets) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, no tax credit shall be allowed for those costs for which the deduction is taken.
     The basis for eligible property for depreciation of accelerated cost recovery system purposes for state income taxes shall be reduced by the amount of credit allowable and claimed.
     (b)  The credit allowed under this section shall be claimed against the net income tax liability for the taxable year.  For the purposes of this section, "net income tax liability" means net income tax liability reduced by all other credits allowed under this chapter.
     (c)  If the tax credit under this section exceeds the taxpayer's income tax liability, the excess of credits over liability shall be refunded to the taxpayer; provided that no refunds or payment on account of the tax credits allowed by this section shall be made for amounts less than $1.  All claims, including any amended claims, for tax credits under this section shall be filed on or before the end of the twelfth month following the close of the taxable year for which the credit may be claimed.  Failure to comply with the foregoing provision shall constitute a waiver of the right to claim the credit.
     (d)  To qualify for this tax credit, a production shall:
     (1)  Meet the definition of a qualified production [specified in subsection (1)];
     (2)  Have qualified production costs totaling at least $200,000;
     (3)  Provide the State, at a minimum, a shared-card, end-title screen credit, where applicable;
     (4)  Provide evidence of reasonable efforts to hire local talent and crew; and
     (5)  Provide evidence of financial or in-kind contributions or educational or workforce development efforts, in partnership with related local industry labor organizations, educational institutions, or both, toward the furtherance of the local film [and], television [and], digital media, and animation or special and visual effects industries.
     (e)  On or after July 1, 2006, no qualified production cost that has been financed by investments for which a credit was claimed by any taxpayer pursuant to section 235-110.9 is eligible for credits under this section.
     (f)  To receive the tax credit, the taxpayer shall first prequalify the production for the credit by registering with the department [of business, economic development, and tourism] during the development or preproduction stage.  Failure to comply with this provision may constitute a waiver of the right to claim the credit.
     (g)  The director of taxation shall prepare forms as may be necessary to claim a credit under this section.  The director of taxation may also require the taxpayer to furnish information to ascertain the validity of the claim for credit made under this section and may adopt rules necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section pursuant to chapter 91.
     (h)  Every taxpayer claiming a tax credit under this section for a qualified production shall, no later than ninety days following the end of each taxable year in which qualified production costs were expended, submit a written, sworn statement to the department [of business, economic development, and tourism], identifying:
     (1)  All qualified production costs as provided by subsection (a), if any, incurred in the previous taxable year;
     (2)  The amount of tax credits claimed pursuant to this section, if any, in the previous taxable year; and
     (3)  The number of total hires versus the number of local hires by category [(i.e., department)] and by county.
     (i)  The department [of business, economic development, and Tourism] shall:
     (1)  Maintain records of the names of the taxpayers and qualified productions thereof claiming the tax credits under subsection (a);
     (2)  Obtain and total the aggregate amounts of all qualified production costs per qualified production and per qualified production per taxable year; and
     (3)  Provide a letter to the director of taxation specifying the amount of the tax credit per qualified production for each taxable year that a tax credit is claimed and the cumulative amount of the tax credit for all years claimed.
     Upon each determination required under this subsection, the department [of business, economic development, and tourism] shall issue a letter to the taxpayer, regarding the qualified production, specifying the qualified production costs and the tax credit amount qualified for in each taxable year a tax credit is claimed.  The taxpayer for each qualified production shall file the letter with the taxpayer's tax return for the qualified production to the department of taxation.  Notwithstanding the authority of the department [of business, economic development, and tourism] under this section, the director of taxation may audit and adjust the tax credit amount to conform to the information filed by the taxpayer.
     (j)  Total tax credits claimed per qualified production shall not exceed $8,000,000.
     (k)  Qualified productions shall comply with subsections (d), (e), (f), and (h).
     (l)  For the purposes of this section:
     "Animation or special and visual effects" means animation or special and visual effects created primarily with digital technologies for designing, modeling, rendering, lighting, painting, animating, motion capture, and compositing for qualified productions, but does not include:
     (1)  Audio effects;
     (2)  In-camera effects;
     (3)  Credit rolls;
     (4)  Subtitles; or
     (5)  Animation or special and visual effects for use in promotional material for a production eligible for the tax credit established under this section.
     "Commercial":
     (1)  Means an advertising message that is filmed using film, videotape, or digital media, for dissemination via television broadcast [or], theatrical distribution[;], or Internet distribution; and
     (2)  Includes a series of advertising messages if all parts are produced at the same time over the course of six consecutive weeks[; and
     (3)  Does not include an advertising message with Internet-only distribution].
     "Department" means the department of business, economic development, and tourism.
     "Director" means the director of business, economic development, and tourism.
     "Digital media" means production methods and platforms directly related to the creation of cinematic imagery and content, specifically using digital means, including but not limited to digital cameras, digital sound equipment, and computers, to be delivered via film, videotape, audio recording, interactive game platform, or other digital distribution media (excluding Internet-only distribution).
     ["Post production"] "Post-production" means production activities and services conducted after principal photography is completed, including but not limited to editing, film and video transfers, duplication, transcoding, dubbing, subtitling, credits, closed captioning, audio production, [special effects (visual and sound),] sound effects, graphics, and animation or special and visual effects.
     "Production" means a series of activities that are directly related to the creation of visual and cinematic imagery to be delivered via film, videotape, or digital media and to be sold, distributed, or displayed as entertainment or the advertisement of products for mass public consumption, including but not limited to preproduction related activities, scripting, casting, set design and construction, transportation, videography, photography, sound recording, interactive game design, animation or special and visual effects, and [post production.] post-production.
     "Qualified production":
     (1)  Means a production, with expenditures in the State, for the total or partial production of a feature-length motion picture, short film, made-for-television movie, commercial, music video, interactive game, television series pilot, single season (up to twenty-two episodes) of a television series regularly filmed in the State (if the number of episodes per single season exceeds twenty-two, additional episodes for the same season shall constitute a separate qualified production), television special, single television episode that is not part of a television series regularly filmed or based in the State, national magazine show, [or] national talk show[.], or short or long-form productions for Internet distribution.  For the purposes of subsections (d) and (j), each of the aforementioned qualified production categories shall constitute separate, individual qualified productions; and
     (2)  Does not include:  [daily]
         (A)  Daily news; [public]
         (B)  Public affairs programs; [non national]
         (C)  Non-national magazine or talk shows; [televised]
         (D)  Televised sporting events or activities; [productions]
         (E)  Productions that solicit funds; [productions]
         (F)  Productions produced primarily for industrial, corporate, institutional, or other private purposes; and [productions]
         (G)  Productions that include any material or performance prohibited by chapter 712.
     "Qualified production costs" means the costs incurred by a qualified production within the State that are subject to the general excise tax under chapter 237 or income tax under this chapter and that have not been financed by any investments for which a credit was or will be claimed pursuant to section 235‑110.9.  Qualified production costs include but are not limited to:
     (1)  Costs incurred during preproduction such as location scouting and related services;
     (2)  Costs of set construction and operations, purchases or rentals of wardrobe, props, accessories, food, office supplies, transportation, equipment, and related services;
     (3)  Wages or salaries of cast, crew, and musicians;
     (4)  Costs of photography, sound synchronization, lighting, and related services;
     (5)  Costs of editing, animation or special and visual effects, music, other post-production, and related services;
     (6)  Rentals and fees for use of local facilities and locations;
     (7)  Rentals of vehicles and lodging for cast and crew;
     (8)  Airfare for flights to or from Hawaii, and interisland flights;
     (9)  Insurance and bonding;
    (10)  Shipping of equipment and supplies to or from Hawaii, and interisland shipments; [and]
    (11)  Costs for equipment or items not readily obtainable in the State that are passed through a vendor registered to do business in the State of Hawaii and upon which a mark-up and general excise tax are paid; and
   [(11)] (12)  Other direct production costs specified by the department of taxation in consultation with the department of business, economic development, and tourism."
     SECTION 3.  The department of taxation shall submit an annual report to the legislature twenty days prior to each regular session beginning with the 2013 regular session.  The report shall contain a cost benefit analysis of the tax credits established in this Act including but not limited to the following:
     (1)  The total number of full-time, part-time, and contract personnel on the payroll necessary to administer this Act; and
     (2)  The average wage of each of the above personnel groups and total earnings for the year.
     The department of taxation shall report the data collected under this section along with a cumulative total of tax credits granted for each qualified production.  The legislature may use the information to determine whether the tax credits are meeting the objectives of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Act 88, Session Laws of Hawaii 2006, is amended by amending section 4 to read as follows:
     "SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2006; provided that[:
     (1)  Section] section 2 of this Act shall apply to qualified production costs incurred on or after July 1, 2006[, and before January 1, 2016; and
     (2)  This Act shall be repealed on January 1, 2016, and section 235-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall be reenacted in the form in which it read on the day before the effective date of this Act]."
     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012; provided that:
     (1)  This Act is repealed on January 1, 2020, and section 235-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall be reenacted in the form in which it read on the day before the effective date of Act 88, Session Laws of Hawaii 2006; and
     (2)  This Act shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011, and before January 1, 2020.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Creative Media Development
 
Description:
Amends section 235-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, by expanding the definitions of qualified productions to include animation or special and visual effects and productions for internet distribution and providing the sunset date for the tax credit as amended by this Act as January 1, 2020.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
