HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2410
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE MILITARY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that a 2011 report by the RAND Corporation determined that the United States military accounted for more than eighteen per cent of all spending in Hawaii in 2009, or $12,220,000,000.  The report, which was commissioned by the Hawaii Institute of Public Affairs and the Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii, found that military expenditures in Hawaii during fiscal years 2007 to 2009 averaged $6,527,000,000 per year in 2009 dollars — more than $4,000,000,000 for personnel and over $2,000,000,000 for the procurement of goods and services.  Most of the procurement dollars were concentrated on Oahu and a third of that spending went to construction.  The report also found that the military was responsible for 101,533 jobs during 2007 to 2009, or 16.5 per cent of the State's total work force.
The RAND report confirms that the military plays a vital role in Hawaii's economy and rivals tourism for the largest industry in the State.  It is therefore imperative that measures are taken to preserve the economic benefits from military operations in Hawaii, which include the various facilities of the United States Army (including Fort Shafter, Schofield Barracks, Tripler Army Medical Center, and Pohakuloa Training Area), Marine Corps (Marine Corps Base Hawaii), Navy (Pearl Harbor Naval Air Station and Barbers Point Naval Air Station), Air Force (Bellows Air Force Station and Hickam Air Force Base), and Coast Guard (Station Maui and the Integrated Support Command in Honolulu).
     The purpose of this Act is to strengthen the state economy and maintain the mutually beneficial relationship between the State and the military by requiring the governor to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the United States Department of Defense to provide continued support for the military's presence in Hawaii.
     SECTION 2.  The governor on behalf of the State shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with the United States Department of Defense to enhance the State's relationship with the military and provide continued support for the military's presence in Hawaii.  The memorandum of understanding may be amended from time to time and shall establish roles and responsibilities for collaborative efforts to preserve and encourage military operations in Hawaii, which efforts may include:
     (1)  Retaining or expanding military bases and training areas in the State;
     (2)  Limiting the development of areas adjacent to military bases to ensure land uses that are compatible with base activities;
     (3)  Facilitating affordable housing located near military bases for military personnel and their families;
     (4)  Offering recreational programs, facilities, and promotions for military personnel and their families;
     (5)  Identifying civil obligations that may be postponed to accommodate deployed military personnel;
     (6)  Supporting families dealing with military deployments;
     (7)  Providing work-force training opportunities for military personnel to advance their careers and pursue education;
     (8)  Exploring the granting of credit for military training toward civilian credentialing and licensing for certain trades;
     (9)  Encouraging the hiring of military spouses; and
    (10)  Promoting awareness, education, and appreciation for military operations in the State.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Support for Military Presence in Hawaii; Memorandum of Understanding
 
Description:
Requires the Governor to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the U.S. Department of Defense to provide continued support for the military's presence in Hawaii.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
