HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2559
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MORTALITY REVIEW OF DEATHS OF PERSONS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL OR INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 321, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART   .  MORTALITY REVIEW OF DEATHS OF PERSONS WITH DEVELOPMENTAL OR INTELLECTUAL DISABILITIES
     §321-Multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality reviews.  The department of health may conduct multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality review of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities in order to reduce the incidence of preventable deaths to persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities.
     §321-Definitions.  As used in this part:
     "Adult" means a person over seventeen years of age.
     "Adult death review information" means information regarding the adult person and person's family, including but not limited to:
(1)  Social, medical, and legal histories;
(2)  Death and birth certificates;
(3)  Law enforcement investigative data;
(4)  Medical examiner or coroner investigative data;
(5)  Parole and probation information and records;
(6)  Information and records of social service agencies;
(7)  Educational records; and
(8)  Health care institution information.
     "Department" means the department of health.
     "Developmental disability" means a severe, chronic disability of a person that:
     (1)  Is attributable to a mental or physical impairment or combination of mental and physical impairments;
     (2)  Is manifested before the person attains age twenty-two;
     (3)  Is likely to continue indefinitely;
     (4)  Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the following areas of major life activity: self-care, receptive and expressive language, learning, mobility, self-direction, capacity for independent living, and economic self-sufficiency; and
     (5)  Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special, interdisciplinary, or generic care, treatment, or other services which are of lifelong or extended duration and are individually planned and coordinated.
     "Director" means the director of health or the director’s designated representative.
     "Disabled person" means an adult with a developmental or intellectual disability.
     "Intellectual Disability" means significantly subaverage general intellectual functioning resulting in or associated with concurrent moderate, severe, or profound impairments in adaptive behavior and manifested during the developmental period.
     "Preventable death" means a death that reasonable medical, social, legal, psychological, or educational intervention may have prevented.
     "Provider of medical care" means any health care practitioner who provides, or a facility through which is provided, any medical evaluation or treatment, including dental and mental health evaluation or treatment.
     §321-Access to information.  (a)  Upon written request of the director, all providers of medical care or other services, and state and county agencies shall disclose to the department, and those individuals appointed by the director to participate in the mortality review of a death of a person with developmental or intellectual disabilities, adult death review information regarding the circumstances of a death of a person with developmental or intellectual disabilities so that the department may conduct multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality review of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities pursuant to section 321-31 and this part.
     (b)  To the extent that this section conflicts with other state confidentiality laws, this section shall prevail.
     §321-Exception.  Information regarding an ongoing civil or criminal investigation shall be disclosed at the discretion of the applicable state, county, or federal law enforcement agency.
     §321-Use of information and records from mortality reviews of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities.  (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this part, all information and records acquired by the department during its multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality reviews of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities pursuant to this part is confidential and may be disclosed only as necessary to carry out the purposes of this part.
     (b)  Information and statistical compilations of data from the multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality reviews of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities that do not contain any information that would permit the identification of any person shall be public records.
     (c)  No individual participating in the department's multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality review of a death of a person with developmental or intellectual disabilities may be questioned in any civil or criminal proceeding regarding information presented in or opinions formed as a result of a meeting of the multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality review of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities.  Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent a person from testifying to information obtained independently of the department's multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality review of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities, or which is public information, or where disclosure is required by law or court order.
     (d)  Information held by the department as a result of a multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality review of a death of a person with developmental or intellectual disabilities conducted under this part is not subject to subpoena, discovery, or introduction into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding, except that information otherwise available from other sources is not immune from subpoena, discovery, or introduction into evidence through those sources solely because they were provided as required by this part.
     §321-Immunity from liability.  All agencies and individuals participating in multidisciplinary and multiagency mortality reviews of deaths of persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities pursuant to this part shall not be held civilly or criminally liable for providing the information required under this part.
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Mortality Review for Persons with Developmental or Intellectual Disabilities
 
Description:
Creates a new part in chapter 321, Hawaii Revised Statutes, giving the Department of Health the authority to obtain all records for death review for persons with developmental or intellectual disabilities.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
