HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2512
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 93, Hawaii Revised Statutes, establishes and describes a system for distributing state and county publications.  The intent of this Act is to simplify distribution in response to changes in technology and to reduce printing, workload, and delivery costs for all agencies by reducing the number of print copies required by chapter 93.  This Act also stipulates that the document distribution center be notified of electronic publications by state and county agencies.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 93, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§93-     Notification when electronic publications posted.  Every state and county agency shall immediately notify the state publications distribution center with identification and location information for each electronic publication made available on a public networked information system such as the internet."
     SECTION 3.  Section 93-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§93-2  Definitions.  ["Print" includes all forms of printing and duplications, except administrative forms.] 
     "Publication" [includes any document, compilation, journal, report, statute, regulation, ordinance issued in print by any state or county agency, and confidential publications which shall be deposited in accordance with security regulations to be determined by the issuing agency.] means informational matter produced for public distribution or access in any tangible medium, originating or produced with the imprint of, by the authority of, or at the total or partial expense of any agency of the State or a county government.  It does not include manuals, calendars, schedules, correspondence, or forms intended strictly for in-house use of governmental agencies, scholarly publications of the University of Hawaii press, and materials developed by the department of education specifically for instructional use with students.
     "State and county agency" includes every state, city and county, and county office, officer, department, board, commission, and agency, whether in the legislative, executive, or judicial branch."
     SECTION 4.  Section 93-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§93-3  Deposit of publications.  Every state and county agency shall immediately upon release of a publication, deposit [fifteen] seven copies with the state publications distribution center and one copy with the University of Hawaii.  Additional copies of the publications shall be deposited with the publications distribution center upon request of [the state librarian] a representative of that center so long as copies are available.
     The state librarian may enter into depository agreements with private and public educational, historical, or scientific institutions or other libraries, within or without the State in order to achieve the objectives sought under this part."
     SECTION 5.  Section 93-11, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§93-11  Disposition of statutes and court reports.  In addition to the copies of Hawaiian statutes and supreme court reports that may be disposed of by sale, exchange, or presentation to public officers for official use, [not more than fifty] copies of each volume may be presented to libraries of educational, historical, or scientific institutions or other libraries of a public or quasi-public nature in the State and elsewhere."
     SECTION 6.  Section 93-5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is repealed.
     ["§93-5 Rules.  The board of education may make such rules as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this part."]
     SECTION 7.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 8.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Government Publications
 
Description:
Updates the existing chapter 93, Hawaii Revised Statutes, in response to changes in technology and reduces printing, workload, and delivery costs for all state and county agencies.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
