HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2578
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR COMMUNITY SERVICES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 371K-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended to read as follows:
     "§371K-3  General functions, duties, and powers of the executive director.  The executive director shall:
     (1)  Serve as the principal official in state government responsible for the coordination of programs for the needy, poor, and disadvantaged persons, refugees, and immigrants;
     (2)  Oversee, supervise, and direct the performance by subordinates of activities in such areas as planning, evaluation, and coordination of programs for disadvantaged persons, refugees, and immigrants and development of a statewide service delivery network;
     (3)  Assess the policies and practices of public and private agencies impacting on the disadvantaged and conduct advocacy efforts on behalf of the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants;
     (4)  Devise and recommend legislative and administrative actions for the improvement of services for the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants;
     (5)  Serve as a member of advisory boards and panels of state agencies in such areas as child development programs, elder programs, social services programs, health and medical assistance programs, refugee assistance programs, and immigrant services programs;
     (6)  Administer funds allocated for the office of community services; and apply for, receive, and disburse grants and donations from all sources for programs and services to assist the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants;
     (7)  Adopt, amend, and repeal rules pursuant to chapter 91 for purposes of this chapter;
     (8)  Retain such staff as may be necessary for the purposes of this chapter, who may be exempt from chapters 76; and
     (9)  Contract for services as may be necessary for the purposes of this chapter[;].
   [(10)  Orient members of the advisory council to the goals, functions, and programs of the office; and
    (11)  Seek the input of council members on all matters pertaining to the functions of the office.]″
     SECTION 2.  Section 371K-5 and Section 371K-6, Hawaii Revised Statutes, are repealed.
     [″[§371K-5]  Advisory council for community services; composition and compensation.  (a)  There is established within the office of community services, the advisory council for community services, herein referred to as council, except as otherwise indicated.  The council shall be composed of twelve members appointed by the governor subject to section 26-34, except as provided in this section.  Members shall have had training, experience, or special knowledge concerning human services programs.  Of the twelve members:
     (1)  Four members shall be representatives of client groups served by the office of community services which shall include: one member from the client group previously served by the progressive neighborhood program; one member from the client group previously served by the Hawaii office of economic opportunity; one member from the client group previously served by the refugee resettlement program; and one member from the client group previously served by the state immigrant services center;
     (2)  Two members shall be representatives of private organizations which are engaged in the planning or delivery of human services; and
     (3)  Six members shall be from the general public, at least one representative from each county, provided that not more than three shall be from Oahu.
     (b)  Members of the council shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses, including travel expenses, necessary for performance of their duties.
     [§371K-6]  Council, duties.  The council shall:
     (1)  Advise the executive director, the governor, and the legislature on matters relating to programs and services for the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants;
     (2)  Assist the executive director in determining program and policy needs and priorities for the State in establishing and implementing a comprehensive program for the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants in accordance with the goals and objectives expressed in this chapter;
     (3)  Assist the executive director in formulating short-term and long-range goals for programs and services for the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants;
     (4)  Assist the executive director in consulting with and seeking the opinion of the general public in relation to a comprehensive system of programs and services for the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants;
     (5)  Assist the executive director in the evaluation of general and specific policies relating to the needs of the disadvantaged, refugees, and immigrants; and
     (6)  Assist the executive director in encouraging both public and private agencies and programs to work toward the development and maintenance of a comprehensive and coordinated system for human services.″]
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Advisory Council for Community Services
 
Description:
Abolishes the Advisory Council for Community Services.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
