HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2532
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO A DISCOUNT AND SAVINGS PROGRAM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  There are limited funds for the preservation and protection of land resources and other natural resources managed by the State, especially in times of an economic downturn.  Many of these resources are found in Hawaii and nowhere else.  There are also limited funds available for the trust lands designated to support native Hawaiian communities.  This discount and savings program proposes to generate a revenue stream for the department of Hawaiian home lands, which manages land resources and supports native Hawaiian communities.  The purposes of this Act are to:
     (1)  Establish a discount and savings program;
     (2)  Generate revenue for the department of Hawaiian home lands; and
     (3)  Educate program participants about Hawaii′s natural resources.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
DISCOUNT AND SAVINGS PROGRAM.
     §   -1  Establishment.  The chairman of the Hawaiian homes commission is authorized to establish a discount and savings program to provide any program card holder a series of discounts to businesses, vendors, merchants, stores, or other commercial entities.  Any start-up costs will be expended by the department of Hawaiian home lands.
     §   -2  Price.  The chairman of the Hawaiian homes commission shall establish a price for the program card commensurate with the services and benefits provided to a program card holder.
     §   -3  Participation.  Any business, vendor, merchant, store, or other commercial entity registered to do business in the State may choose to participate in this program.  A discount for goods or services, to be determined by the individual business, vendor, merchant, store, or other commercial entity, may be offered to a card holder.
     §   -4  Program card sales and promotion.  The discount and savings program card shall be available for purchase at any State-owned property, the site of any participating business, any office of the department of Hawaiian home lands, and other sites to be determined.  It shall be the responsibility of a transportation company to distribute, prior to the debarkation of passengers, informational and promotional material on the discount and savings program and educational material on land and natural resources managed by the State.
     §   -5  Development and implementation agreements.  The chairman of the Hawaiian homes commission may enter into cooperative agreements with government and nongovernment entities for the development and implementation of the discount and savings program.
     §   -6  Deposit of revenues.  Revenues collected from the sale of the discount and savings program card shall be deposited into the department of Hawaiian home lands' Hawaiian home operating fund.
     §   -7  Program administration.  A portion of revenues collected from the sale of the discount and savings program card shall be used for the administration of the program."
     SECTION 3.  If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Act, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable.
     SECTION 4.   This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Discount and Savings Program
 
Description:
Establishes a discount and savings program to generate revenue for the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands for the purpose of maintaining its trust lands and communities, and educating participants about the state's lands and natural resources.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
