HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2519
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATED TO EARLY LEARNING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the early childhood years from birth to age five are critical to an individual's  health, educational success and well-being throughout the life span.
     Research has found that over eighty-five per cent of a child's brain development, in response to the stimulation the child receives, happens by age five.  Children's early experiences, from birth to age five, lay the groundwork for a child's lifelong learning and behavior.  Studies have shown that high quality preschool programs directly impact children's ability to be ready for school.  There is now evidence that high quality preschool, along with full-day kindergarten maximize the chances of children having strong third grade reading results.
     In addition, research finds that investing in high quality early learning programs produces significant returns later.  In Hawaii, every $1 spent in high quality early childhood education realizes a $4.20 reduction in costs for future educational and social interventions.  In 2011, the department of education reported that state-wide about forty-two per cent of Hawaii's public school kindergarten students did not attend preschool.  In a November 27, 2011, Hawaii Star Advertiser article, it was reported that elementary school principals and child advocates say kindergarteners without preschool experience are more likely to enter school far behind their peers.
     To improve the educational outcomes of Hawaii's people, we must promote our children's school readiness, through high quality early learning experiences, starting with high quality preschool that is affordable and accessible.  High quality preschool will not only lead to better educational outcomes in kindergarten and third grade, it will also reduce costs for educational and social interventions later. 
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of           , or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012 - 2013, to provide funding to continue to develop and implement Hawaii's school readiness agenda.  This funding is needed for the early learning council and the governor's early childhood coordinator to further develop and implement the components of our State's comprehensive early childhood system and to develop, execute, and monitor a phased implementation plan for a public-private preschool program for four-year olds, including a financial business plan with potential sources of sustainable revenue.
The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Education; Early Childhood
 
Description:
Appropriates funds to the Department of Education to support early childhood education.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
