HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2516
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR EARLY CHILDHOOD HEALTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the early childhood years are critical to an individual's health, educational success, and well-being throughout the life span.
     A large body of evidence ties experiences in early childhood with health throughout life, particularly in adulthood.  For example, in 2011 the Institute of Medicine's Standing Committee on Childhood Obesity Prevention issued its "Early Childhood Obesity Prevention Policies", which recognized that early childhood has emerged as a critical period for assessing the beginnings of obesity and instituting preventive measures.  Childhood obesity is a serious public health problem that has adverse and long-lasting consequences for individuals, families, and communities.  Childhood obesity tends to persist into adulthood and increases the risk for chronic diseases, including diabetes.  In Hawaii, adult obesity has more than doubled between 1995 and 2009, and childhood obesity increased by thirty-eight per cent between 1999 and 2009.  As a result of the increased risks related to obesity, this generation of children may be the first generation not to outlive their parents due to unhealthy lifestyles.  Obesity-related medical expenditures in Hawaii were over $323,000,000 in 2009, and are continuing to rise.  Sedentary lifestyles combined with an excess of poor dietary choices, including the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages, contribute to the rapid and steady increase in obesity in Hawaii.  The establishment of unhealthy behaviors in a child's early years, such as drinking too many sugary drinks or being too sedentary, can set the stage for obesity and its related health problems.
     To improve the health of Hawaii's people, we must promote healthy lifestyles from the earliest years that will continue throughout the life span.  Preventing obesity in infants and young children holds promise for enabling significant gains toward both reversing the epidemic of childhood obesity and reducing obesity in adulthood.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of           , or so much thereof as may be necessary, for fiscal year 2012 - 2013 to (1) collect and analyze Hawaii-specific early childhood overweight and obesity data to identify children at risk; (2) increase awareness of the health implications of early childhood obesity; (3) promote best practices through community based initiatives to improve healthy life choices; and (4) establish a task force to develop and recommend legislation related to the prevention of childhood obesity.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Health; Early Childhood
 
Description:
Appropriates funds to the Department of Health to support early childhood development.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
