HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2561
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SOLID WASTE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purposes of this Act are to:
     (1)  Clarify that the solid waste management surcharge applies to solid waste shipped outside the State for disposal;
     (2)  Clarify that the solid waste management surcharge applies to solid waste disposed of at waste-to-energy facilities; and
     (3)  Increase the solid waste management surcharge using a tiered structure commensurate with the impact of the means of disposal on the department.
     SECTION 2.  Section 342G-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new definition to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
     ""Waste-to-energy facility" means a facility that uses a waste source either to create energy in the form of electricity or heat or to derive a form of fuel through processes that include incineration, gasification, thermal depolymerization, pyrolysis, plasma arc gasification, anaerobic digestion, fermentation, and mechanical biological treatment."
     SECTION 3.  Section 342G-62, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is established a solid waste management surcharge.  The solid waste management surcharge shall be [35 cents]:
(1)  $1.25 per ton of solid waste disposed of within the State at permitted or unpermitted [solid waste disposal facilities.]  Landfills or transferred to solid waste reduction facilities within the State that collect solid waste for transport to an out-of-state landfill or incineration facility; provided that there shall be no surcharge for ash originating from waste-to-energy facilities within the State that is disposed of at any permitted or unpermitted landfill within the State; and
(2)  60 cents per ton of solid waste disposed of within the State at permitted or unpermitted waste-to-energy facilities; provided that there shall be no surcharge for solid waste disposed of within the State at permitted or unpermitted waste-to-energy facilities that accept less than 150,000 tons of solid waste annually.
The surcharge shall be paid by the person or entity doing the disposal[.] at a permitted or unpermitted landfill or at a waste-to-energy facility, or the person or entity responsible for the preparation of the out-of-state transfer of collected solid waste, as the case may be.  The owner or operator of the facility shall transfer all moneys collected from the surcharge to the department through a quarterly reporting and payment schedule.  Estimates of quarterly solid waste disposal shall be submitted prior to the first day of each quarter and the transfer of moneys collected shall occur within thirty days of the end of each quarter."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on January 1, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Solid Waste; Disposal Surcharge
 
Description:
Increases the solid waste management surcharge to $1.25 per ton of solid waste disposed of in landfills or shipped out-of-state; increases the solid waste management surcharge to 60 cents per ton of solid waste disposed of at waste-to-energy facilities that accept 150,000 tons or more of solid waste annually; provides for no surcharges to waste-to-energy facilities that accept less than 150,000 tons of solid waste annually and for ash disposed of in landfills that originates from a waste-to-energy facility, and defines "waste-to-energy facility".
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
