HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2542
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII INTERAGENCY COUNCIL ON HOMELESSNESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that homelessness is a complex and multifaceted issue requiring planning, coordination, implementation, and funding across federal, state, local, business, and community lines.  Locally, many government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and other private sector organizations have worked diligently and successfully to assist those who are homeless.  Yet, Hawaii has experienced an increase in the number of homeless individuals and families.
     According to 2009 data, Hawaii has twice as many people who are homeless per 100,000 people as the national average.  The 2011 State-wide Point in Time Count indicated a six per cent increase in homelessness throughout the State.  Further, 2010 data indicate that almost one third of the sheltered homeless are children; more than ten per cent are veterans; over sixty per cent have lived in Hawaii for more than ten years; almost half of the families who are homeless include someone who is employed; and almost thirty per cent are Hawaiian or part Hawaiian; thus, showing that there is no single profile of someone who is homeless.
     In January 2011, the governor of the State of Hawaii pronouncing the elimination of homelessness a "moral imperative", appointed the first governor's coordinator on homelessness, to lead the effort to prevent and eliminate homelessness in Hawaii through the use of strategic approaches, structural changes, and unprecedented collaborative and civic involvement.
     On March 4, 2011, the governor of the State of Hawaii hosted with the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, an interagency leadership forum on homelessness attended by leaders from government, business, the community, and the faith community, to advocate for the development of a collaborative strategy to end homelessness in Hawaii.
     On June 22, 2010, the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness, comprised of nineteen Cabinet Secretaries and agency heads, released "Opening Doors:  Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness", the nation's first comprehensive strategic plan to prevent and end homelessness.
     "Opening Doors" identified the following four ambitious goals of finishing the job of ending chronic homelessness in five years; preventing and ending homelessness among veterans in five years; preventing and ending homelessness for families, youth, and children in ten years; and setting a path to ending all types of homelessness.
     The governor of Hawaii has found it to be imperative and in the public interest to capitalize on the opportunities and momentum generated by the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness, to provide leadership for the prevention and elimination of homelessness, and to keep Hawaii at the forefront of providing care to its residents in the spirit of the Law of the Splintered Paddle (Ke Kānāwai Mamalahoe), Hawaii State Constitution, Article IX, Section 10.
     Consequently, on July 19, 2011, Governor Neil Abercrombie, through the issuance of Executive Order No. 11-21, pursuant to the provisions of section 26-41, Hawaii Revised Statutes, temporarily established the Hawaii interagency council on homelessness.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish the Hawaii interagency council on homelessness by statute, which will further enhance the ability of the council to provide solutions for ending homelessness in Hawaii.  By establishing the interagency council on homelessness by statute the importance of ending homelessness will be highlighted and continuity through administrations is strengthened.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART  .  HAWAII INTERAGENCY COUNCIL ON HOMELESSNESS
     §346-     Hawaii interagency council on homelessness; establishment.  There is established the Hawaii interagency council on homelessness, which shall be an advisory body exempt from section 26-34, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The Hawaii interagency council on homelessness shall be placed within the department of human services for administrative purposes.
     The Hawaii interagency council on homelessness shall:
     (1)  Serve as the statewide homelessness planning and policy development entity with broad representation from state and county government and the community;
     (2)  Formulate and advise the governor on the implementation of a unified ten-year, statewide plan to address homelessness in all Hawaii counties;
     (3)  Facilitate the acquisition of funding and resources for state and county homeless programs;
     (4)  Recommend policy, regulatory and statutory changes, and identify resource strategies for the successful execution of the ten-year plan;
     (5)  Assemble accurate fiscal and demographic information to support policy development and track outcomes;
     (6)  Consider collaborative homelessness initiatives of other states that have demonstrated positive measurable outcomes as possible models for state and local programs;
     (7)  Promote systems integration of social, health, training, and housing services to reduce duplication among homeless assistance programs;
     (8)  Advise on the development and implementation of a public education program on homelessness in Hawaii and disseminate information including data and best practices; and
     (9)  Report annually to the governor, the legislature, and the mayors on the progress of its activities, including formulation and progress of the ten-year plan.
     The ten-year plan will be developed to assist individuals who are homeless or facing homelessness; prioritize the needs of the most vulnerable individuals and families; encourage and promote partnerships between public and private entities to identify, renovate, and secure dignified transitional, as well as, permanent housing options; promote development and utilization of support services including job training, mental health, and substance abuse treatment that will enhance the transition out of homelessness; increase access to public areas for all members of the community; support efforts to obtain accurate statistics on those who are homeless; and activate, coordinate, and maintain responsive action among the public, business, and faith-based communities to become part of the homelessness solution strategy.
     §346-    Membership.  The Hawaii interagency council on homelessness shall be composed of the following members:
     (1)  Governor's coordinator on homelessness, who will serve as chair;
     (2)  Director of human services or designee;
     (3)  Administrator of the homeless programs office of the department of human services or designee;
     (4)  Director of health or designee;
     (5)  Director of labor and industrial relations or designee;
     (6)  Director of public safety or designee;
     (7)  Director of business, economic development, and tourism or designee;
     (8)  Adjutant general of the department of defense or designee
     (9)  Administrator of the office of Hawaiian affairs or designee;
    (10)  Attorney general or designee;
    (11)  Superintendent of education or designee;
    (12)  One representative to be designated by the speaker of the house of representatives;
    (13)  One senator to be designated by the president of the senate;
    (14)  The mayor of each of each county or designee;
    (15)  A representative of the United States Department of Veterans Affairs;
    (16)  A representative from the Office of Community Planning and Development, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development;
    (17)  A representative of the Continuum of Care Network of the city and county of Honolulu;
    (18)  A representative of the Continuum of Care Network of Maui, Kauai, and Hawaii counties;
    (19)  A representative of a faith-based organization with interfaith relationships, to be designated by the governor; and
    (20)  A representative of the business community, to be designated by the governor.
     The non-governmental members of the Hawaii interagency council on homelessness shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses, including travel expenses, necessary for the performance of their duties.
     In the event a Hawaii interagency council on homelessness member is unable to attend a meeting, the member may appoint a designee to attend and to act on the member's behalf during the meeting.
     §346-    Meetings.  The Hawaii Interagency Council on Homelessness shall meet quarterly, or more frequently as it deems necessary.
     A majority of the members of the Hawaii interagency council on homelessness shall constitute a quorum to do business and to validate any decision or act of the council."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          , or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, for administrative expenses of the Hawaii interagency council on homelessness.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012; provided that on June 30, 2022, this Act shall be repealed.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
BY REQUEST
 

 
Report Title:
Homelessness; Interagency Council; Department of Human Services; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the Hawaii Interagency Council on Homelessness to be administratively placed within the Department of Human Services; makes an appropriation for administrative expenses.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
