HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2646
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that public utilities commissioners who live on neighbor islands are required to spend an inordinate amount of travel expenses and travel time to meet in Honolulu for required administrative proceedings.  The public utilities commission has jurisdiction over the regulation of public utilities, motor carriers, water carriers, one call centers, and petroleum industry information reporting.  The legislature further finds that fairness calls for neighbor island public utilities commissioners to receive a per diem allowance and the cost of one weekly round trip airfare, payable from the public utilities commission special fund.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the use of moneys in the public utilities commission special fund to pay a public utilities commissioner who resides on an island other than Oahu a per diem allowance equal to that paid to members of the legislature and airfare for one weekly round trip for meetings and hearings on Oahu.
     SECTION 2.  Section 269-33, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is established in the state treasury a public utilities commission special fund to be administered by the public utilities commission.  The proceeds of the fund shall be used by the public utilities commission and the division of consumer advocacy of the department of commerce and consumer affairs for all expenses incurred, including payment to a commissioner who resides on an island other than Oahu of per diem allowance equal to that paid to members of the legislature whose legal residence is on an island other than Oahu and airfare for one weekly round trip for meetings and hearings on Oahu, in the administration of chapters 269, 271, 271G, 269E, and 486J; provided that the expenditures of the public utilities commission shall be in accordance with legislative appropriations.  On a quarterly basis, an amount not exceeding thirty per cent of the proceeds remaining in the fund after the deduction for central service expenses, pursuant to section 36‑27, shall be allocated by the public utilities commission to the division of consumer advocacy and deposited in the compliance resolution fund established pursuant to section 26‑9(o); provided that all moneys allocated by the public utilities commission from the fund to the division of consumer advocacy shall be in accordance with legislative appropriations."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Utilities Commission; Travel; Per Diem
 
Description:
Requires payment to public utilities commissioners who reside on an island other than Oahu of per diem allowance and weekly round trip airfare.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
