HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
263
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TORTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 663-15.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§663-15.5  Release; joint tortfeasors; co-obligors; good faith settlement.  (a)  A release, dismissal with or without prejudice, or a covenant not to sue or not to enforce a judgment that is given in good faith under subsection (b) to one or more joint tortfeasors, or to one or more co-obligors who are mutually subject to contribution rights, shall:
     (1)  Not discharge any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor not released from liability unless its terms so provide;
     (2)  Reduce the claims against the other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor not released in the amount stipulated by the release, dismissal, or covenant, or in the amount of the consideration paid for it, whichever is greater; and
     (3)  Discharge the party to whom it is given from all liability for any contribution to any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor.
This subsection shall not apply to co-obligors who have expressly agreed in writing to an apportionment of liability for losses or claims among themselves.
     (b)  For purposes of subsection (a), any party shall petition the court for a hearing on the issue of good faith of a settlement entered into by the plaintiff or other claimant and one or more alleged tortfeasors or co-obligors, serving notice to all other known joint tortfeasors or co-obligors.  Upon a showing of good cause, the court may shorten the time for giving the required notice to permit the determination of the issue before the commencement of the trial of the action, or before the verdict or judgment if settlement is made after the trial has commenced.
     The petition shall indicate the settling parties and, except for a settlement that includes a confidentiality agreement regarding the case or the terms of the settlement, the basis, terms, and settlement amount.
     The notice, petition, and proposed order shall be served as provided by rules of court or by certified mail, return receipt requested.  Proof of service shall be filed with the court.  Within twenty-five days of the mailing of the notice, petition, and proposed order, a nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor may file an objection to contest the good faith of the settlement.  If none of the nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasors or co-obligors files an objection within the twenty-five days, the court may approve the settlement without a hearing.  An objection by a nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor shall be served upon all parties.  A nonsettling alleged joint tortfeasor or co-obligor asserting a lack of good faith shall have the burden of proof on that issue.
     Where a confidentiality agreement has been entered into regarding the claim or settlement terms, the court shall hear the matter in a manner consistent with preventing public disclosure of the agreement while providing other joint tortfeasors and co-obligors sufficient information to object to a proposed settlement.
     (c)  The court may determine the issue of good faith for purposes of subsection (a) on the basis of affidavits or declarations served with the petition under subsection (a), and any affidavits or declarations filed in response.  In the alternative, the court, in its discretion, may receive other evidence at a hearing.
     (d)  A determination by the court that a settlement was made in good faith shall:
     (1)  Bar any other joint tortfeasor or co-obligor from any further claims against the settling tortfeasor or co-obligor, except those based on a written indemnity agreement; and
     (2)  Result in a dismissal of all cross-claims filed against the settling joint tortfeasor or co-obligor, except those based on a written indemnity agreement.
     (e)  A party aggrieved by a court determination on the issue of good faith may appeal the determination.  The appeal shall be filed within twenty days after service of written notice of the determination, or within any additional time not exceeding twenty days as the court may allow.
     (f)  The running of any statute of limitations or other time limitations shall be tolled during the period of consideration by the court on the issue of good faith.
     (g)  The procedures, rights, and obligations of this section shall apply to a release, dismissal, or covenant given before, as well as after, a lawsuit has been filed and does not require the existence of a lawsuit.
     (h)  This section shall not apply to a release, dismissal with or without prejudice, or a covenant not to sue or not to enforce judgment given to a co-obligor on an alleged contract debt where the contract was made prior to January 1, 2002.
     (i)  When a release has been given pursuant to the terms of this chapter, nonsettling parties shall have the right to require that a court include the settling entities upon any verdict or judgment form, such that the finder of fact shall consider and make a finding as to any liability, responsibility, or apportionment of fault of the settling entities, and the nonsettling parties shall be allowed to present evidence at trial as to the liability, responsibility, or apportionment of fault of the settling entity.  Nothing in this subsection shall preclude a nonsettling party from obtaining judgment pursuant to the Hawaii Rules of Civil Procedure as a matter of law prior to or during trial."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
By Request
 

 
Report Title:
Torts; Joint and Several Liability
 
Description:
Permits the finder of fact to consider the civil liability of settling entities when determining the non-settling parties' liability.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
