HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2635
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii plays a critical role in international affairs given its central location in the Pacific Ocean.  In November 2011, Hawaii hosted the 23rd Annual Leader's Meeting of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC).  The success of APEC 2011 was greatly influenced by the efforts of the APEC Hawaii Host Committee, which was comprised of important government, business, and educational leaders.
     As a member of the APEC Hawaii Host Committee, the lieutenant governor of the State of Hawaii played a critical role in coordinating state and county government resources that ensured a successful APEC Leader's Meeting, demonstrating beyond any doubt that Hawaii is a credible, convenient, and legitimate location to conduct international business and affairs.
     The purpose of this Act is to temporarily transfer the responsibility of the office of international affairs from the department of business, economic development, and tourism to the office of the lieutenant governor.
     SECTION 2.  Section 26-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (d) to read as follows:
     "(d)  In addition to the functions and duties provided by law, the lieutenant governor shall assume administrative responsibility for the office of information practices[.] and the office of international affairs."
     SECTION 3.  Section 201-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is established[, within the department of business, economic development, and tourism, an] a temporary office of international affairs[.] for a special purpose within the office of the lieutenant governor for administrative purposes."
     SECTION 4.  All appropriations, records, equipment, machines, files, supplies, contracts, books, papers, documents, maps, and other personal property heretofore made, used, acquired, or held by the department of business, economic development, and tourism, relating to the functions transferred to the office of the lieutenant governor shall be transferred with the functions to which they relate.
     SECTION 5.  All rights, powers, functions, and duties of the office of international affairs are transferred to the office of the lieutenant governor.
     All officers and employees whose functions are transferred by this Act shall be transferred with their functions and shall continue to perform their regular duties upon their transfer, subject to the state personnel laws and this Act.
     No officer or employee of the State having tenure shall suffer any loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefit or privilege as a consequence of this Act, and such officer or employee may be transferred or appointed to a civil service position without the necessity of examination; provided that the officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed; and provided that subsequent changes in status may be made pursuant to applicable civil service and compensation laws.
     An officer or employee of the State who does not have tenure and who may be transferred or appointed to a civil service position as a consequence of this Act shall become a civil service employee without the loss of salary, seniority, prior service credit, vacation, sick leave, or other employee benefits or privileges and without the necessity of examination; provided that such officer or employee possesses the minimum qualifications for the position to which transferred or appointed.
     If an office or position held by an officer or employee having tenure is abolished, the officer or employee shall not thereby be separated from public employment, but shall remain in the employment of the State with the same pay and classification and shall be transferred to some other office or position for which the officer or employee is eligible under the personnel laws of the State as determined by the head of the department or the governor.
     SECTION 6.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on January 1, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Office of International Affairs; Transfer
 
Description:
Transfers administrative responsibility of the Office of International Affairs from the DBEDT to the Office of the Lieutenant Governor.  Makes temporary the Office of International Affairs.  Effective 01/01/13.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
