HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2684
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ZIPPER LANE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The State of Hawaii's highways are necessary to accommodate the transportation needs of the people of the State.  Increased time spent on the road in travel decreases time spent with family or at work, work efficiency, and quality of life.  As the population grows, especially on the west side of Oahu, the need for travel lanes will increase.
     Having high occupancy vehicle lanes, such as zipper lanes, provides an incentive to carpool, effectively reducing the number of cars on the road.  However, the zipper lane could be more effective if it extended westward from Waipahu toward Kapolei, west of the Kunia on-ramp.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of transportation to conduct a study on the feasibility of extending the zipper lane westward from Waipahu toward Kapolei, west of the Kunia on-ramp.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of transportation shall conduct a study on the feasibility of extending the zipper lane westward from Waipahu toward Kapolei, west of the Kunia on-ramp on the island of Oahu.  The feasibility study shall include at least the following:
     (1)  A review of existing traffic conditions and how traffic conditions can be improved by extending the zipper lane westward;
     (2)  The number and locations of additional entrances to the zipper lane;
     (3)  A cost-benefit analysis of extending the zipper lane westward;
     (4)  An identification and evaluation of desired, intended, and unintended effects of extending the zipper lane westward;
     (5)  A timetable for the construction of this extension; and
     (6)  Any other issues deemed necessary or relevant by the director of transportation.
     (b)  The department of transportation shall submit a written report of findings and recommendations, including any necessary proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $200,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for a study on the feasibility of extending the zipper lane westward from Waipahu toward Kapolei, west of the Kunia on-ramp.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of transportation for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Transportation; Zipper Lane Extension; Feasibility Study; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Transportation to conduct a feasibility study on the extension of the zipper lane westward from Waipahu toward Kapolei, west of the Kunia on-ramp.  Appropriates funds for the study.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
