HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2644
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that from smart grid to broadband, Hawaii is facing many new opportunities and challenges in utility technologies and policies that are reshaping our vision of the State's future, and in the process redefining Hawaii's economy for decades to come.  Yet in order to successfully take advantage of these opportunities to fundamentally improve Hawaii's network of infrastructure, our regulatory bodies must effectively oversee and guide our utilities on that path.
     The legislature further finds that for the public utilities commission to appropriately guide the development and modernization of Hawaii's infrastructure in the twenty-first century, its procedures and processes must reflect best practices that most effectively help stakeholders navigate the emerging economic, technological, and regulatory transformations that are taking place in Hawaii's utility sector.  From increasing transparency and public access, to streamlining internal and external procedures, to adopting the best regulatory frameworks for fostering growth and development, it is imperative that the commission use the necessary tools and best practices to effectively and efficiently make informed decisions about Hawaii's future infrastructure.
     The purpose of this Act is to increase transparency and efficiency at the public utilities commission by requiring the adoption of best practices in relation to all commission activities, both internal and external, to ensure the commission is in the best position to guide the State in utility matters.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 269, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§269-    Commission best practices.  (a)  The commission shall integrate and implement best practices in the following areas, including but not limited to:
     (1)  The use of innovative regulatory frameworks to solve utility issues and concerns resulting from economic, technological, and policy changes;
     (2)  The making and updating of rules and procedures that streamline the internal and external procedures of the commission, in particular streamlining and shortening the timeframe of procedural actions; and
     (3)  The use of information technology to improve internal workflow, transparency, and public access to filings and data.
     (b)  The commission shall establish a system to gather, assess, and update utility and regulatory best practices, and implement appropriate best practices, particularly in areas set forth in subsection (a).
     (c)  The commission shall submit an annual report to the legislature on the progress made in implementing best practices no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $85,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, to carry out the purposes of this Act, including the hiring of necessary consultants.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the public utilities commission for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Utilities Commission; Best Practices; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the Public Utilities Commission to implement best practices in the areas of regulatory frameworks, rules and procedures, and information technology and public access.  Appropriates funds to implement best practices.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
