HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2681
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ELECTRIC GUNS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 134-16, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§134-16  Restriction on possession, sale, gift, or delivery of electric guns.  (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, including a licensed manufacturer, licensed importer, or licensed dealer, to possess, offer for sale, hold for sale, sell, give, lend, or deliver any electric gun.
     (b)  Any electric gun possessed, offered, held, sold, given, lent, or delivered in violation of subsection (a) shall be confiscated and disposed of by the chief of police.
     (c)  This section shall not apply to:
     (1)  Law enforcement officers of county police departments;
     (2)  Law enforcement officers of the department of public safety;
     (3)  Conservation and resources enforcement officers of the department of land and natural resources;
     (4)  Members of the army or air national guard when assisting civil authorities in disaster relief, civil defense, or law enforcement functions, subject to the requirements of section 121-34.5; and
     (5)  Vendors providing electric guns to the individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (4);
provided that electric guns shall at all times remain in the custody and control of the law enforcement officers of the county police departments, the law enforcement officers of the department of public safety, the conservation and resources enforcement officers of the department of land and natural resources, or the members of the army or air national guard.
     (d)  The county police departments of this State, the department of public safety, the department of land and natural resources, and the army and air national guard shall maintain records regarding every electric gun in their custody and control.  The records shall report every instance of usage of the electric guns; in particular, records shall be maintained in a similar manner as for those of discharging of firearms.  The county police departments, the department of public safety, the department of land and natural resources, and the army and air national guard shall annually report to the legislature regarding these records no later than twenty days before the beginning of each regular session of the legislature.
     (e)  The department of land and natural resources and the department of public safety shall ensure that each of their conservation and resources enforcement officers and law enforcement officers who is authorized to use an electric gun and related equipment shall first receive training from the manufacturer or from a manufacturer-approved training program, as well as by manufacturer-certified or approved instructors in the use of electric guns prior to deployment of the electric guns and related equipment in public.  Training for conservation and resources enforcement officers of the department of land and natural resources and law enforcement officers of the department of public safety may be done concurrently to ensure cost savings.
     [(f)  The conservation and resources enforcement program of the department of land and natural resources shall meet the law enforcement accreditation or recognition standards of the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies, Inc., in the use of electric guns prior to obtaining electric guns, related equipment, and training for the use of the electric guns.]"
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Electric Guns; Department of Land and Natural Resources
 
Description:
Repeals the requirement that the Conservation and Resources Enforcement Program of the Department of Land and Natural Resources meet law enforcement accreditation or recognition standards of the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies prior to using or obtaining electric guns, related equipment, and training.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
