HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2697
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO RESIDENTIAL CARE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that residential care facilities are an important option for elderly persons who require living assistance, personal care services, and appropriate medical care.  Hawaii has a complex system of residential care settings for adults unable to care for themselves, including adult residential care homes, extended care adult residential care homes, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, and community care foster family homes.
     The legislature finds that there is a division in responsibility for regulating and overseeing residential care facilities in the State.  The department of health licenses adult residential care homes, extended care adult residential care homes, assisted living facilities, and nursing homes.  Community care foster family homes are licensed by the department of human services.
     The legislature also finds that the State's home and community-based residential care system would benefit from a single governmental agency overseeing all aspects of residential care facilities.
     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to establish a residential care facility reform task force to determine the feasibility of a single agency overseeing all aspects of residential care facilities.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established a residential care facility reform task force within the department of health for administrative purposes to consist of eleven members as follows:
     (1)  The director of health or the director's designee;
     (2)  The director of human services or the director's designee;
     (3)  A representative from a licensed adult residential care home;
     (4)  A representative from a licensed extended care adult residential care home;
     (5)  A representative from a licensed assisted living facility;
     (6)  A representative from a licensed nursing home;
     (7)  A representative from a licensed community care foster family home; and
     (8)  Four community stakeholders.
     (b)  The members of the residential care facility reform task force shall choose a chairperson from among their membership.
     (c)  The residential care facility reform task force shall:
     (1)  Assess the current allocation of responsibilities for quality assurance across state departments;
     (2)  Review the standards and inspection processes for residential care facilities and nursing homes;
     (3)  Recommend an integrated management strategy for adult residential care facilities; and
     (4)  Proposed amendments to existing law necessary to implement a single agency that would oversee all aspects of residential care facilities in the State.
     (d)  Members of the residential care facility reform task force shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for reasonable travel expenses.
     (e)  The residential care facility reform task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     (f)  The residential care facility reform task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Long-term Care Commission; Department of Health; Residential Care Facility Reform Task Force; Kupuna Caucus
 
Description:
Establishes the residential care facility reform task force until 6/30/2013 to determine the feasibility of a single agency overseeing all aspects of residential care facilities in the State.  Report to the legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
