HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
276
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO STATE DEPARTMENTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 26, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part II to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§26-     State departments; license and permit operations manual; requirements.  (a)  Any department covered under this chapter that issues a license or permit shall prepare and employ a license and permit operations manual for use by department staff to evaluate, approve, or disapprove any license or permit issued by the department.  The department license and permit operations manual shall cover all licenses or permits issued by all agencies organically part of, under, or administratively attached to the department.
     (b)  The department license and permit operations manual shall include:
     (1)  A description of each type of license or permit issued by the department and any subordinate or attached agency, including all permitted activities allowed under each license or permit;
     (2)  Qualification requirements, prerequisites, or any other condition required of applicants for a license or permit;
     (3)  Method and criteria used by a department to evaluate an applicant for a license or permit;
     (4)  Standards for approving and disapproving a license or permit;
     (5)  Specific department divisions, offices, or staff responsible for processing, evaluating, approving or disapproving, or issuing a license or permit described under paragraph (1);
     (6)  License and permit timelines, including filing deadlines, notification requirements, decision-making deadlines, and any specific deadline that triggers an automatic approval or disapproval by operation of law; and
     (7)  Filing, document, processing, administrative, late, or any other fees or other changes regarding a license or permit."
     SECTION 2.  All license and permit operations manuals required under this Act shall be in operational use by           .
     SECTION 3.  The governor shall submit a report to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session, regarding the progress or completion of every department's license and permit operations manual.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Departments; Licenses and Permits; Operations Manual
 
Description:
Requires all departments to have a written license and permit operations manual for the evaluation, approval, and disapproval of licenses and permits.  Requires the governor to report to the 2012 legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
