HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2793
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO BOARD OF LAND AND NATURAL RESOURCES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 171-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§171-4  Board of land and natural resources; terms and qualifications of members of the board; organization; expenses.  (a)  The board of land and natural resources shall be composed of seven members, one from each land district and three at large, to be nominated and, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, appointed by the governor as provided in section 26-34[.]; provided that for the purposes of making determinations on ocean resources matters, the board shall consist of eleven members, the additional four ocean resource members being appointed pursuant to subsections (e) and (f).  The term and removal of a member of the board and the filling of a vacancy on the board shall also be as provided in section 26-34.  There shall be not more than three members on the board from the same political party.  At least one member of the board shall have a background in conservation and natural resources, as evidenced by:
     (1)  A college degree in a relevant field, including forestry, wildlife conservation, geology, environmental science, or marine biology; or
     (2)  Work history sufficient to demonstrate an appropriate level of knowledge in the subject of land and natural resources, including parks and recreation, public lands management, natural area reserves, aquatic resources, boating and recreation, forestry and wildlife, water resources management, or conservation and resources.
     (b)  Each member shall disclose and file with the board a list of all transactions with the department of land and natural resources in which the member has a direct interest.  The member shall also disclose all transactions with the department involving any corporation, association, partnership, or joint venture in which the member is an officer, partner, or employee.  Any member having any interest, direct or indirect, in any matter before the board shall disqualify oneself from voting on or participating in the discussion of the matter.
     (c)  The governor shall select a chairperson of the board from among its members.  The chairperson shall call and preside at meetings and may appoint a member of the board as secretary.  The members of the board shall choose one of their number to act as chairperson during the absence or disability of the chairperson.
     (d)  The members of the board shall serve without pay but shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenses while attending meetings and while in the discharge of their duties.
     (e)  The four ocean resources members of the board shall be appointed by the governor to represent at least four of the following categories:
     (1)  A fishery science representative with a master of science or doctorate degree in fisheries science and experience in Hawaii-based commercial, recreational, or subsistence fisheries; provided that for the purposes of this paragraph, a qualifying fishery science shall not include ecology, marine biology, or other non-fishery marine science fields;
     (2)  A fishing industry representative with experience in the commercial fishing industry and active participation in government agency fishery management and regulatory processes;
     (3)  A fishing community representative with experience and working knowledge of Hawaii non-commercial fisheries, including recreation, subsistence, and indigenous fisheries and active participation in government fishery management and regulatory processes;
     (4)  A seafood industry representative with experience and working knowledge of Hawaii seafood processing and marketing industry and active participation in government fishery management and regulatory processes; and
     (5)  A marine industry representative with experience in Hawaii maritime industries of boating, shipping, and maritime products.
     (f)  The four ocean resources members, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, shall be appointed to the board by the governor pursuant to section 26-34.  These four members shall be considered in determining quorum and majority only on issues relating to ocean resources and may vote only on issues related to ocean resources.  The political party affiliation of the four ocean resources members, if any, shall not apply to the political party limitation in subsection (a), nor shall there be a limit on the number of ocean resources members from any one political party."
     SECTION 2.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

 
Report Title:
Ocean Resources; Board of Land and Natural Resources
 
Description:
Adds 4 members to the board of land and natural resources who shall be considered in determining quorum and majority only on issues relating to ocean resources and may vote only on ocean resources issues.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
