HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2773
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE WEED AND SEED PROGRAM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that weed and seed is a program administered by the United States Attorney's Office in partnership with the YMCA of Honolulu.  Initiated in the country in 1992, weed and seed is a comprehensive multi-agency approach to law enforcement, crime prevention, and community revitalization.  Although no longer funded by the United States Department of Justice, weed and seed is a recognized "brand name" in Hawaii, having been in existence since 1998.  The legislature finds that it is a robust program, doing substantial good in our communities.
     The weed and seed program is a collaborative effort among law enforcement agencies at the federal, state, and county levels; social service agencies; private businesses; faith-based organizations; the public sector, including city, state, and federal departments; schools; nonprofit organizations; and residents to reclaim, restore, and rebuild communities.  The four key elements of the weed and seed program are:
     (1)  Law enforcement;
     (2)  Community policing;
     (3)  Prevention, intervention, and treatment programs; and
     (4)  Neighborhood restoration.
The weed and seed program works with local law enforcement to prevent, control, and reduce violent crime, drug abuse, and gang activity in targeted neighborhoods by "weeding" out the criminal element in the community.  Community policing involves having police officers work closely with community residents to develop solutions to violent and drug-related crimes.  "Seeding" the community involves collaboration among various human services organizations to implement prevention, intervention treatment, and neighborhood revitalization projects, programs, and activities.
     The legislature also finds that the State has benefited greatly from weed and seed, based on programs at sites on Oahu that encompass Kalihi-Palama, Chinatown, Downtown Honolulu, Ala Moana, Sheridan, McCully, Waipahu, and Ewa Beach.  Since the implementation of the program, crime in those areas has decreased significantly.  The legislature further finds that the program's success warrants the continued operation of weed and seed in these communities, and envisions expanding it to other communities in the future.
     The purpose of this Act is to:
     (1)  Establish a permanent weed and seed program within the department of labor and industrial relations to continue the program's success; and
     (2)  Appropriate funds to maintain current operations of the weed and seed program and expand the weed and seed program into other areas of the State.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 371, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§371-    Weed and seed program.  (a)  There is established within the department the weed and seed program to reduce crime and improve the quality of life for residents and neighborhoods in the State.  The weed and seed program shall be a collaborative effort among community residents, law enforcement agencies, social service providers, educators, area businesses, and other resource agencies and support organizations to:
     (1)  Create, initiate, implement, and support responsible community-based activities, projects, and services that help reduce crime and drug use in neighborhoods;
     (2)  Engage members of the community to encourage the development and maintenance of economic and social well-being; and
     (3)  Teach and model collaborative efforts that focus on sustainable results.
     (b)  No later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session of the legislature, the department shall submit a report to the legislature and the governor on its activities relating to the weed and seed program, including projects completed or ongoing, funds expended, and other relevant data or information on the program."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to maintain the weed and seed program in areas currently designated for the weed and seed program and to expand the weed and seed program into other areas of the State.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of labor and industrial relations for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Weed and Seed Program; DLIR; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the weed and seed program under the department of labor and industrial relations.  Makes appropriation.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
