HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2712
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO STATE EQUIPMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that used state office equipment with residual value is often discarded in landfills once it is seen as outdated.  There, the equipment harms the environment, generally, and avian species, in particular.  Simultaneously, many schools and nonprofit organizations need office equipment and will accept or purchase the used equipment from the State.
     The legislature finds that amending chapter 103D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to require state departments and agencies to sell or donate their used equipment with residual value before disposing of it, will be beneficial to schools, nonprofit organizations, and the environment.
     This Act requires that after the used state office equipment is placed on the disposal list, as required by current administrative rule, and remains on that list without being accepted or purchased by a school or nonprofit for a designated period of time, it be sold to a company for recycling.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 103D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part XII to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§103D-     Required donation or sale before discarding equipment as solid waste.  (a)  After June 30, 2013, no state surplus equipment shall be discarded as solid waste unless:
     (1)  Offered for sale or donation to a school, school district, or nonprofit organization; and
     (2)  Offered for sale through competitive sealed bid, public auction, established market, or posted prices to at least one organization or business capable of refurbishing sellable equipment and removing salvageable components.
     (b)  The department of accounting and general services, on behalf of the state procurement office, shall submit a report to the legislature, no later than twenty days prior to the regular session of 2015, and each regular session thereafter indicating the following:
     (1)  The quantity and nature of surplus equipment replaced or upgraded;
     (2)  The quantity and nature of surplus equipment offered for sale or donation to schools, school districts, and nonprofit organizations;
     (3)  The quantity and nature of surplus equipment purchased or accepted as a donation by schools, school districts, and nonprofit organizations;
     (4)  The quantity and nature of surplus equipment purchased by organizations or businesses capable of refurbishing sellable equipment and removing salvageable components; and
     (5)  The amount of proceeds generated from the sale of surplus equipment to schools, school districts, nonprofit organizations, organizations, and businesses capable of refurbishing sellable equipment and removing salvageable components.
     (c)  Proceeds generated from the sale of surplus equipment shall be deposited pursuant to section 103D-1214.
     (d)  The department of accounting and general services and the state procurement office may adopt rules, pursuant to chapter 91, necessary to implement this section."
     SECTION 3.  Section 103D-1201, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding three new definitions to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
     ""Nonprofit organization" means a private, nonprofit, tax-exempt corporation, association, or organization listed in section 501(c)(3), Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
     "School" means any day care center, child care facility, headstart program, preschool, kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school, public or private, including any special school for children in the State.
     "Surplus equipment" means typewriters, copiers, calculators, telephones, cell phones, computers, computer components, printers, and electronic devices typically used in an office environment that are no longer in use by a department and are deemed by the department to have residual market value."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Equipment; Computers; Office Equipment; Donation; Re-sale
 
Description:
Requires state departments to attempt to sell or donate office equipment to schools, nonprofits, or salvage businesses before disposal.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
