HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2798
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO A VETERANS TREATMENT COURT.
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

PART I
     SECTION 1.  After September 11, 2001, members of the United States armed forces and reserves and the Hawaii national guard were engaged in combat in Afghanistan and Iraq at an unprecedented pace.  Recent research confirms that a significant number of soldiers--by some estimates, one in five--return home from war with a combat-related mental health condition, such as post-traumatic stress disorder, traumatic brain injury, sexual trauma, substance abuse, or other mental and emotional health conditions.  In addition, judges in Hawaii have reported an increase in cases that involve veterans.
     The first veterans court was established in 2008 in Buffalo, New York.  Similar models have subsequently emerged across the country.  The goal of these courts is to enhance the effectiveness of the criminal justice system through:
     (1)  Early intervention and diversion from incarceration;
     (2)  Individualized assessment of problems, including those related to substance abuse;
     (3)  Judicial tracking and increased judicial involvement in monitoring treatment participation using incentives for compliance and graduated sanctions for noncompliance;
     (4)  Encouragement of veterans to accept responsibility for their conduct; and
     (5)  Rehabilitation of veterans and their successful reintegration into society.
     The legislature finds that the State's prison system is severely overcrowded and that further alternatives to incarceration, including the provision of appropriate treatment and counseling and more intensive supervision, are needed.  Successful intervention by the temporary veterans court is expected to have a long-term positive impact upon prison overcrowding, the costs of high rates of incarceration, public safety, probation and parole workloads, and case flow through the judicial system.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a temporary veterans treatment court at the state circuit court level.
PART II
     SECTION 2.  (a)  A temporary Hawaii veterans treatment court shall be established and administered by a circuit court judge of the first circuit to be selected by the chief justice. 
     (b)  A veteran shall be eligible to participate in the Hawaii veterans treatment court if:
     (1)  The veteran is arrested for or charged with a felony or misdemeanor offense that does not involve the use or threatened use of force or violence;
     (2)  The court before which the veteran appears finds that the veteran suffers from a combat-related brain injury, mental illness, or mental disorder, including post-traumatic stress disorder;
     (3)  The prosecuting attorney of the applicable county approves the transfer of the case from the regular court system to the Hawaii veterans treatment court; and
     (4)  The court before which the veteran appears allows the veteran to choose whether to proceed through the veterans treatment court or through the traditional criminal justice system.
     (c)  The temporary Hawaii veterans treatment court may substitute a treatment plan model for traditional court processing for all participating veterans.  The veterans treatment court shall include the following components:
     (1)  Emphasis on early identification and timely placement of eligible veterans;
     (2)  Cooperation between prosecution and defense counsel to promote public safety and protect participating veterans' due process rights, using a nonadversarial approach;
     (3)  Integration of alcohol or drug treatment and mental health services with the processing of cases in the criminal justice system;
     (4)  Access for participating veterans to a continuum of alcohol or drug, mental health, and other treatment and rehabilitation services, including veteran peer mentors;
     (5)  Frequent testing of participating veterans for alcohol and other drugs;
     (6)  Establishment of a coordinated strategy by the veterans treatment court to respond to a participating veteran's compliance or noncompliance with the veteran's treatment regimen;
     (7)  Ongoing interaction by the veterans treatment court judge with each participating veteran;
     (8)  Establishment of a monitoring and evaluation system to determine the extent to which the veterans treatment court achieves its goals, and the court's effectiveness;
     (9)  Engagement by the veterans treatment court staff in continuing interdisciplinary education; and
    (10)  Encouragement by the veterans treatment court of partnerships between the court, the United States Department of Veterans Affairs, community-based organizations, public agencies, and other entities, to create local support and promote the veterans treatment court's effectiveness.
     (d)  For the purposes of this part:
     "Participating veteran" means a veteran who is participating in the Hawaii veterans treatment court program.
     "Veteran" has the same meaning as set forth in section 706‑605.1(5), Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 3.  (a)  The judiciary is authorized to establish the following temporary positions for the purpose of implementing the Hawaii veterans treatment court pursuant to section 2 of this Act for fiscal year 2012-2013, to be funded from the appropriation authorized in section 4 of this Act:
     (1)  One full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE) social worker V position ($          );
     (2)  Two full-time equivalent (2.0 FTE) social worker IV positions ($           each); and
     (3)  One full-time equivalent (1.0 FTE) circuit court clerk II position ($          ).
     (b)  The judiciary may seek federal grants and awards and other moneys to fund the temporary Hawaii veterans treatment court.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for staffing, equipment, and other expenses for the implementation and operation of the temporary Hawaii veterans treatment court.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the judiciary for the purposes of this Act.
PART III
     SECTION 5.  Section 706-605.1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§706-605.1  Intermediate sanctions; eligibility; criteria and conditions.  (1)  The judiciary shall implement alternative programs that place, control, supervise, and treat selected defendants in lieu of a sentence of incarceration.
     (2)  Defendants may be considered for sentencing to alternative programs if they:
    (a)   Have not been convicted of a non-probationable class A felony; and
    (b)   [Have not, within] Within the previous five years, have not been convicted of a crime involving serious bodily injury or substantial bodily injury as defined by chapter 707.
     (3)  A defendant may be sentenced by a district, family, or circuit court judge to alternative programs.
     (4)  As used in this section, "alternative programs" means programs that, from time to time, are created and funded by legislative appropriation or federal grant naming the judiciary or one of its operating agencies as the expending agency and that are intended to provide an alternative to incarceration.  Alternative programs may include:
    (a)   House arrest, or curfew using electronic monitoring and surveillance, or both;
    (b)   Drug court programs for defendants with assessed alcohol or drug abuse problems, or both;
    (c)   Veterans treatment court programs for defendants who are veterans and who meet specific requirements;
  [(c)]   (d)  Therapeutic residential and nonresidential programs, including secure drug treatment facilities;
  [(d)]   (e)  A program of regimental discipline pursuant to section 706-605.5; and
  [(e)]   (f)  Similar programs created and designated as alternative programs by the legislature or the administrative director of the courts for qualified defendants who do not pose significant risks to the community.
     (5)  As used in this section, "veteran" means a person who served on active duty in the armed forces of the United States, a reserve component thereof, or the national guard, and who was federally activated and released honorably."
PART IV
     SECTION 6.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012, and shall be repealed on June 30, 2021; provided that section 706-605.1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, shall be reenacted in the form in which it read on the day before the effective date of this Act.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii Veterans Court; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a temporary Hawaii veterans treatment court within the judiciary.  Appropriates funds.  Repealed on 6/30/21.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
