HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2737
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ANIMAL CRUELTY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that an estimated forty-three per cent of households in Hawaii include a dog.  Profit-driven breeding is prevalent in Hawaii and recent research by the Hawaiian Humane Society reveals that on Oahu, during a two-week period in November, over three hundred sixty puppies were available for sale.  When projected over a one-year period, revenues from sales of dogs may be equal to or exceed $9,400,000.
     The legislature further finds that a law is needed to ensure that dogs at large-scale breeding facilities receive sanitary living conditions, proper and timely medical care, the ability to move freely at least once per day, and adequate shelter from the elements.  Existing state and federal laws regarding the care and husbandry of dogs inadequately regulate large-scale breeding facilities in Hawaii.  Inadequate regulation places an unfair fiscal burden on the county and state taxpayers, government agencies, and nongovernmental organizations, whose resources contribute to the care of dogs discarded or abused by large-scale breeding facilities.
     The purpose of this Act is to:
     (1)  Require owners of ten or more dogs over the age of six months with sexual organs intact to meet minimum standards of care to ensure the proper treatment and care of the dogs and their offspring;
     (2)  Prohibit the ownership or custody of more than thirty dogs over the age of six months with intact sexual organs; and
     (3)  Require owners of ten or more dogs over the age of six months with sexual organs intact to maintain specific written records of each dog for a specified period.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO DOGS
     "§   -A  Definitions.  (a)  As used in this chapter:
     "Dog" means any animal that is wholly or in part of the subspecies Canis lupus familiaris.
     "Litter" means one or more dogs that are born to the same mother at the same time.
     "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, limited liability company, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, or syndicate; provided that the term shall not include:
     (1)  An animal control or welfare agency exempt under title 26 United States Code section 501(c)(3);
     (2)  A person who provides care for dogs at the request of a government agency; or
     (3)  A veterinary clinic.
     "Regular exercise" means:
     (1)  Walking the dog on a leash; or
     (2)  Allowing the dog to move about freely,
for at least one hour each day at an outdoor or indoor exercise area that provides at least four times the square footage of indoor floor space required for each dog.
     "Sufficient food and clean water" means access to adequate amounts of clean food; and continuous access to potable water that is substantially free from debris.
     "Sufficient housing or shelter" means constant and unfettered access to an indoor enclosure that:
     (1)  Is sufficiently ventilated at all times to minimize odors, drafts, ammonia levels, and to prevent moisture condensation;
     (2)  Has a means of fire suppression, such as functioning fire extinguishers, located within forty feet of the cage or enclosure;
     (3)  Has sufficient lighting to allow for observation of the dogs at any time of day or night;
     (4)  Is not placed more than forty-two inches above the floor;
     (5)  Is not stacked or otherwise placed on top of or below another dog's cage or primary enclosure; and
     (6)  Is cleaned at least once a day of feces, hair, dirt, debris, and food waste.
     "Sufficient space for movement" means space for a covered dog to turn and stretch freely, lie down, and fully extend limbs that includes the following:
     (1)  Sufficient indoor space for each dog to lie down and fully extend limbs and stretch freely without touching the sides of the enclosure or another dog;
     (2)  At least six inches of headroom above the head of the tallest dog in the enclosure when it is in a normal standing position; and
     (3)  A square footage that is at least three times the length and width of the longest dog in the enclosure; provided that the length of the dog shall be measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail.
     "Veterinary care" means an examination performed at least once a year by a veterinarian licensed under chapter 471.
     §   -B  Limit on number of dogs.  No person shall own, possess, control, or otherwise have charge or custody of more than thirty dogs with intact sexual organs over the age of six months at any time.
     §   -C  Standard of care; recordkeeping.  (a)  Any person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise has charge or custody of more than ten dogs over the age of six months with intact sexual organs shall provide the following for each dog:
     (1)  Sufficient space for movement;
     (2)  Regular exercise;
     (3)  Sufficient housing or shelter;
     (4)  Sufficient food and clean water;
     (5)  A microchip implanted under the skin; and
     (6)  Annual veterinary care;
provided that regular exercise shall apply only to dogs aged four months and older; provided further that no microchip shall be implanted in any dog aged four months or less.
     (b)  Any person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise has charge or custody of more than ten dogs over the age of six months with intact sexual organs shall not breed any dog unless the dog is between the ages of twelve months and eight years of age.  No person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise has charge or custody of more than ten dogs over the age of six months with intact sexual organs shall breed any dog determined by a veterinarian to be unfit for breeding purposes.
     (c)  Any person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise has charge or custody of more than ten dogs over the age of six months with intact sexual organs shall maintain a record for each dog including the following information:
     (1)  All health care treatment;
     (2)  The date of birth for the dog or, if the date of birth is unknown, the date the person acquired possession, control, or charge of the dog and the source of the dog;
     (3)  The dates on which the dog has been bred;
     (4)  For a female, the number of dogs in each litter produced; and
     (5)  The disposition the person makes of each dog possessed by, controlled by, or in the charge of the person, including the date of disposition, manner of disposition, and the name and address information for any person taking possession, control or charge of a dog.
     Records shall be retained for at least three years following the death of the dog or a date on which the person permanently ceased to have possession or control of the dog.
     §   -D  Prohibitions on certain types of dogs in the same enclosure.  (a)  Any person who owns, possesses, controls, or otherwise has charge or custody of more than ten dogs over the age of six months with intact sexual organs shall not place:
     (1)  A dog with a vicious or aggressive disposition in an enclosure with another dog, except for breeding purposes;
     (2)  Breeding females in heat in the same enclosure at the same time with sexually mature males, except for breeding purposes;
     (3)  Breeding females and their litters in the same enclosure at the same time with other adult dogs; and
     (4)  Puppies aged twelve weeks or younger in the same enclosure at the same time with other adult dogs, other than the dam or foster dam, unless under immediate supervision.
     §   -E  Penalty.  Any person who violates section    -B,    -C, or    -D shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.  If the circumstances warrant a charge of cruelty to animals in the second degree prescribed under section 711-1109, the defendant may be charged with violating that section instead.
     SECTION 3.  In codifying the new sections added by section 2 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Animal Cruelty; Dog Breeders
 
Description:
Requires specified persons who own, control, or have custody or control of ten or more dogs over age six months with sexual organs intact to meet minimum standards of care to ensure the proper treatment and care of dogs and their offspring.  Prohibits any person from owning or having custody of more than thirty dogs over age six months with sexual organs intact.  Requires specified persons to maintain specific records for each dog for at least three years following the death of the dog or a date on which the person permanently ceased to have possession or control of the dog.  Prohibits certain types of dogs in the same enclosure with other dogs.  Establishes penalties.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
