HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2726
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ANIMALS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that humane societies and animal rescue organizations across Hawaii collectively treat and take in more than 50,000 animals each year.  Spaying and neutering pets is a proven way to reduce pet overpopulation, euthanasia rates, and nuisance animal behaviors and dog bites, as sterilized dogs are less likely to become aggressive.
     The purpose of this Act is to:
     (1)  Establish a spay and neuter special fund; and
     (2)  Allow funds from an income tax check-off to be deposited into the special fund.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 143, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§143-    Spay and neuter special fund.  (a)  There is established the spay and neuter special fund to be administered by the department of budget and finance.  Moneys received by the department from:
     (1)  State income tax refund designations to the special fund pursuant to section 235-102.5(e); and
     (2)  Appropriations or other moneys made available,
shall be deposited into the special fund.  All interest earned or accrued on moneys deposited in the special fund shall become part of the special fund.  Moneys in the special fund shall be expended to cover costs to reduce the number of feral animals through spaying and neutering, educate the public regarding the importance of spaying and neutering pets, and prevent homeless animal overpopulation; provided that moneys used shall follow the eligibility criteria established by the advisory committee.
     (b)  There is established an advisory committee consisting of no more than eight members to assist the department in establishing the eligibility criteria and procedures for disbursements from the special fund.  The advisory committee shall include the following:
     (1)  One member from each county humane society that holds a county animal control contract;
     (2)  One member from two separate private non-profit animal rescue, shelter, or protection organizations that do not hold a county animal control contract;
     (3)  One member representing licensed veterinarians in the State; and
     (4)  One member from the general public.
All members shall be selected by the department, be residents of the State, and serve three-year terms.  All members shall have an active interest in reducing the number of feral pets and educating the community regarding the benefits of pet population control in the State.
     (c)  The advisory committee shall submit to the director of finance a report in a form prescribed by the director identifying the total amount of funds that were disbursed from the special fund in each fiscal year and the amount of funds carried over to the next fiscal year.  The advisory committee shall submit the report to the director of finance within ninety days from the close of each fiscal year."
     SECTION 3.  Section 235-102.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§235-102.5  Income check-off authorized.  (a)  Any individual whose state income tax liability for any taxable year is $3 or more may designate $3 of the liability to be paid over to the Hawaii election campaign fund, any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, when submitting a state income tax return to the department.  In the case of a joint return of a husband and wife having a state income tax liability of $6 or more, each spouse may designate that $3 be paid to the fund.  The director of taxation shall revise the individual state income tax form to allow the designation of contributions to the fund on the face of the tax return and immediately above the signature lines.  An explanation shall be included which clearly states that the check-off does not constitute an additional tax liability.  If no designation was made on the original tax return when filed, a designation may be made by the individual on an amended return filed within twenty months and ten days after the due date for the original return for such taxable year.  A designation once made whether by an original or amended return may not be revoked.
     (b)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any individual whose state income tax refund for any taxable year is $2 or more may designate $2 of the refund to be deposited into the school-level minor repairs and maintenance special fund established by section 302A-1504.5, when submitting a state income tax return to the department.  In the case of a joint return of a husband and wife having a state income tax refund of $4 or more, each spouse may designate that $2 be deposited into the special fund.  The director of taxation shall revise the individual state income tax return form to allow the designation of contributions to the special fund on the face of the tax return and immediately above the signature lines.  If no designation was made on the original tax return when filed, a designation may be made by the individual on an amended return filed within twenty months and ten days after the due date for the original return for such taxable year.  A designation once made, whether by an original or amended return, may not be revoked.
     (c)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any individual whose state income tax refund for any taxable year is $2 or more may designate $2 of the refund to be paid over to the libraries special fund established by section 312-3.6, when submitting a state income tax return to the department.  In the case of a joint return of a husband and wife having a state income tax refund of $4 or more, each spouse may designate that $2 be deposited into the special fund.  The director of taxation shall revise the individual state income tax form to allow the designation of contributions to the fund on the face of the tax return and immediately above the signature lines.  If no designation was made on the original tax return when filed, a designation may be made by the individual on an amended return filed within twenty months and ten days after the due date for the original return for such taxable year.  A designation once made, whether by an original or amended return, may not be revoked.
     (d)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any individual whose state income tax refund for any taxable year is $5 or more may designate $5 of the refund to be paid over as follows:
     (1)  One-third to the Hawaii children's trust fund under section 350B-2; and
     (2)  Two-thirds to be divided equally among:
         (A)  The domestic violence and sexual assault special fund under the department of health in section 321-1.3;
         (B)  The spouse and child abuse special account under the department of human services in section 346‑7.5; and
         (C)  The spouse and child abuse special account under the judiciary in section 601-3.6.
When designated by a taxpayer submitting a state income tax return to the department, the department of budget and finance shall allocate the moneys among the several funds as provided in this subsection.  In the case of a joint return of a husband and wife having a state income tax refund of $10 or more, each spouse may designate that $5 be paid over as provided in this subsection.  The director of taxation shall revise the individual state income tax form to allow the designation of contributions pursuant to this subsection on the face of the tax return and immediately above the signature lines.  If no designation was made on the original tax return when filed, a designation may be made by the individual on an amended return filed within twenty months and ten days after the due date for the original return for such taxable year.  A designation once made, whether by an original or amended return, may not be revoked.
     (e)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, any individual whose state income tax refund for any taxable year is $5 or more may designate $5 of the refund to be deposited into the spay and neuter special fund established under section 143-  , when submitting a state income tax return to the department.  In the case of a joint return of a husband and wife having a state income tax refund of $10 or more, each spouse may designate that $5 be deposited into the special fund.  The director of taxation shall revise the individual state income tax form to allow the designation of contributions to the fund on the face of the tax return and immediately above the signature lines.  If no designation was made on the original tax return when filed, a designation may be made by the individual on an amended return filed within twenty months and ten days after the due date for the original return for such taxable year.  A designation once made, whether by an original or amended return, may not be revoked."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that section 3 shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Spay and Neuter Special Fund; Income Check-off
 
Description:
Establishes a spay and neuter special fund and allows funds from an income tax check-off to be deposited into the special fund.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
