HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2797
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the State is vulnerable to a wide range of natural and man-made hazards that threaten the life, health, and safety of its people; damage and destroy property; disrupt services, businesses, and recreational activities; and impede economic growth and development.  This vulnerability is exacerbated by the growing number of businesses and residences located in coastal areas and an increase in the elderly, tourist, and special needs populations.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish an emergency management task force to ensure state law provides adequate protection to residents, visitors, and businesses during an emergency.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The emergency management task force is established within the legislative reference bureau, for administrative purposes only, to evaluate chapters 127 and 128, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and make recommendations for amending these chapters or creating a new chapter.
     (b)  The emergency management task force shall include the following members:
     (1)  The chair of the senate committee on public safety, government operations, and military affairs, who shall serve as co-chair;
     (2)  The chair of the house of representatives committee on public safety and military affairs, who shall serve as co-chair;
     (3)  The attorney general;
     (4)  The adjutant general;
     (5)  The director of the Hawaii state civil defense;
     (6)  The director of health;
     (7)  The chairperson of the board of land and natural resources;
     (8)  The director of public safety;
     (9)  The director of finance;
    (10)  The director of transportation;
    (11)  The mayor of each county;
    (12)  The chief of the police department and the chief of the fire department of each county;
    (13)  The regional administrator of Region IX, United States Federal Emergency Management Agency, who shall be requested to serve;
    (14)  One member to be appointed by the governor;
    (15)  One member to be appointed by the president of the senate; and
    (16)  One member to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
     (c)  The emergency management task force shall:
     (1)  Evaluate the provisions of chapters 127 and 128, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to determine if adequate safeguards are in place to provide sufficient warning and protection in any emergency to visitors and residents of the State; and
     (2)  Recommend amendments to chapter 127 or 128, the creation of a new chapter, or both.
     (d)  The emergency management task force shall meet no less than five times between June 1, 2012, and December 31, 2012; provided that if necessary, the task force may meet after December 31, 2012.
     (e)  The emergency management task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     (f)  The emergency management task force shall be dissolved on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Emergency Management Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes an emergency management task force to review, evaluate, and make recommendations for the revision of chapters 127 and 128, HRS.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
