HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
272
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HEALTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
HAWAII HEALTH AUTHORITY
     §   ‑1  Hawaii health authority; establishment.  (a)  There is established within the office of the governor for administrative purposes the Hawaii health authority.  The authority shall be an autonomous public body corporate and politic and an instrumentality of the State.
     (b)  The authority shall be composed of nine members appointed by the governor as provided in section 26-34; provided that:
     (1)  Two members shall represent the health industry;
     (2)  Two members shall be practicing physicians;
     (3)  Two members shall represent public health; and
     (4)  Three members shall represent the community at large.
All members shall be appointed for terms of four years each and each member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed.
     The authority shall elect a chairperson from among its members.  Five members shall constitute a quorum, whose affirmative vote shall be necessary for all valid actions by the authority.
     The members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their duties.
     (c)  The authority may appoint and set the salary of an executive director who shall be exempt from chapters 76, 78, and 89.
     §   ‑2  Hawaii health authority; duties and responsibilities.  (a)  The authority shall be responsible for overall health planning for the State and shall provide guidance to the governor and the director of health.
     (b)  The authority shall develop a comprehensive health plan to include:
     (1)  Current and long-term capacity needs of health providers, facilities, equipment, and support services providers;
     (2)  Recommendations for implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act of 2010;
     (3)  Recommendations for implementation of a health insurance exchange;
     (4)  Recommendations for implementation of the Hawai‘i Health Information Exchange (HHIE);
     (5)  Initiatives to increase the number of primary care physicians in Hawaii, including loan repayment programs to maximize federal support;
     (6)  Recommendations regarding patient-centered medical homes; and
     (7)  Other health related recommendations and initiatives, as appropriate.
     (c)  The authority may seek waivers of federal laws, rules, or regulations necessary to implement and maintain the provisions of this chapter.
     (d)  The authority shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 necessary for the purposes of this chapter.
     (e)  The authority shall submit a comprehensive health plan, including findings, recommendations, budget requirements, and proposed implementing legislation, to the governor, the director of health, and the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013, and annual updates to the plan beginning in 2014."
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $500,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the Hawaii health authority, including personnel costs, contracts for services, and other expenses of the authority.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the office of the governor for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


Report Title:
Hawaii Health Authority; Establishment; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a nine-member Hawaii health authority within the office of the governor; establishes responsibilities and duties of the authority; requires annual reports; appropriates funds for the expenses of the authority.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
