HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2739
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  (a)  There is established in the department of human services for administrative purposes a temporary assistance for needy families benefits and coverage temporary task force.  The center for alternative dispute resolution shall assist the temporary task force by providing a facilitator.  The task force shall discuss and seek input on the problems faced by the State in administering the temporary assistance for needy families program and possible methods that can be used to ensure that temporary assistance for needy families benefits and services are provided through public resources to properly address the needs of recipients and their dependent children.  In addition, the task force shall research what other states are doing with respect to the program that help to cover the cost of temporary assistance for needy families benefits and develop a working plan of services that temporary assistance for needy families recipients may be required to perform to continue receiving benefit coverage.
     (b)  The task force shall consist of eleven members, or the member's designee, as follows:
     (1)  A member of the house of representatives appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (2)  A member of the senate appointed by the president of the senate;
     (3)  The director of human services;
     (4)  The administrator of the benefit, employment and support services division of the department of human services;
     (5)  The administrator of the child welfare services branch of the department of human services;
     (6)  The attorney general;
     (7)  One member selected by the benefit, employment and support services division who is a recipient of temporary assistance for needy families benefits; and
     (8)  Four members appointed by the governor from a list submitted jointly by the speaker of the house of representatives and president of the senate, with each member representing a different organization that represents temporary assistance for needy families recipients from each county.
     (c)  The members of the task force shall serve without compensation and shall receive no reimbursement for expenses.
     (d)  The task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     (e)  The task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 2.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Task Force; Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Benefits
 
Description:
Establishes the temporary TANF benefits and coverage task force to look into the problems faced by the State in administering the TANF benefits program, see how other states cover the costs of providing TANF benefits, and develop a working plan of services that TANF recipients may be required to perform for benefits.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
