HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2816
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL PURPOSE REVENUE BONDS FOR LE JARDIN ACADEMY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds and declares that the issuance of special purpose revenue bonds under this Act is in the public interest and for the public health, safety, and general welfare.
     SECTION 2.  Pursuant to part VIII, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the department of budget and finance, with the approval of the governor, is authorized to issue special purpose revenue bonds in a total amount not to exceed $25,000,000, in one or more series, for the purpose of assisting Le Jardin Academy, a private not-for-profit elementary and secondary school, in financing and refinancing the construction, improvement and equipping of its educational facilities in the State of Hawaii.  Le Jardin Academy intends to construct a new administrative building along with new classrooms that will include science laboratories.  These classrooms will be used by both middle and high school students.  A gymnasium and an arts center will also be constructed that will benefit all students in pre-kindergarten through grade twelve.  The legislature hereby finds and determines that the planning, acquisition, construction, improvement, and equipping of such educational facilities constitute a project as defined in part VIII, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and the financing thereof is assistance to a not-for-profit private nonsectarian elementary and secondary school that serves the general public.
     SECTION 3.  The special purpose revenue bonds and the refunding special purpose revenue bonds issued under this Act shall be issued pursuant to part VIII, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, relating to the power to issue special purpose revenue bonds to assist not-for-profit private nonsectarian and sectarian elementary schools, secondary schools, colleges, and universities that serve the general public.
     SECTION 4.  The department of budget and finance is authorized, from time to time, including times subsequent to June 30, 2017, to issue special purpose revenue bonds in whatever principal amounts the department shall determine to be necessary to refund the special purpose revenue bonds authorized in section 2 and to refund special purpose revenue bonds authorized in this section, regardless of whether the outstanding special purpose revenue bonds or refunding special purpose revenue bonds have matured or are the subject of redemption or whether the refunding special purpose revenue bonds shall be bonds for the multi-project programs described in section 2.  In making this determination, the department shall comply with federal law relating to the exemption from federal income taxation of the interest on bonds of the nature authorized by this section.
     SECTION 5.  The authorization to issue special purpose revenue bonds under this Act shall lapse on June 30, 2017.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
SPRB; Le Jardin Academy
 
Description:
Authorizes the issuance of special purpose revenue bonds for Le Jardin Academy for the construction, improvement, and equipping of its educational facilities.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
