HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2813
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND INNOVATION AGENCY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that to be successful in the twenty-first century global economy, Hawaii must position itself as a leader in science and technology.  Innovation in science and technology fields will not only allow the State to succeed in the global marketplace, but will also support Hawaii's sustainable development goals.  This will require a commitment to the development of a highly capable workforce that is able to compete in a technological environment. 
     The legislature further finds that any such advancement will require a combined effort on the part of multiple state and community sectors to improve communication across government, private, and academic entities; to develop networks capable of sustained collaboration; and to prepare today's students to be tomorrow's leaders.
     Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to establish the Hawaii science, technology, and innovation agency through a collaboration between the University of Hawaii at Hilo and Hawaii community college to focus the State's efforts toward these ends.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 304A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new subpart to part IV to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"  .  HAWAII SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND INNOVATION AGENCY
     §304A-     Hawaii science, technology, and innovation agency; establishment.  (a)  There is established the Hawaii science, technology, and innovation agency through a collaboration between the University of Hawaii at Hilo and Hawaii community college. 
     (b)  The purpose of the agency shall be to:
     (1)  Develop systemic models that will create new values regarding science, technology, and innovation, and prepare Hawaii's post-secondary students to advance the State's welfare and prosperity in the future;
     (2)  Prepare a highly capable workforce that is able to support and sustain a high technology society and economy;
     (3)  Generate scientific and technological innovation through the development of formal and informal networks between academia and private industry;
     (4)  Support the development and activities of personnel who are able to advance and deploy science and technology while enhancing communication networks between the public and science- and technology-related professionals;
     (5)  Advance and deploy science and technology for sustainable development in the State; and
     (6)  Play a leadership role in the State's science and technology sector within both the State and a global society.
     (c)  The qualifying standards and conditions related to the receipt of funds under chapter 42F shall not apply to funds received by the Hawaii science, technology, and innovation agency; provided that if the agency contracts in turn with a recipient or provider, then the qualifying standards, conditions, and other provisions of chapter 42F shall apply to the recipient or provider and the contract.
     (d)  To receive state funds, the Hawaii science, technology, and innovation agency shall:
     (1)  Be licensed or accredited in accordance with federal, state, or county laws, rules, or ordinances to conduct the activities or provide the services for which the funds are appropriated;
     (2)  Comply with all applicable federal and state laws prohibiting discrimination against any person on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, creed, sex, age, sexual orientation, disability, or other protected class;
     (3)  Agree not to use state funds for entertainment or lobbying activities;
     (4)  Be incorporated pursuant to chapter 414D;
     (5)  Have been determined and designated to be a tax-exempt organization by the Internal Revenue Service;
     (6)  Maintain bylaws or policies that describe the manner in which the activities or services for which a grant or subsidy is awarded shall be conducted or provided; and
     (7)  Include only members on the governing board who have no material conflict of interest and serve without compensation.
     (e)  The agency shall have the authority to enter into purchase of power agreements.
     (f)  The agency shall have the authority to execute its duties under the purchase of power agreements throughout the affected tax map key areas.
     (g)  The comptroller and state auditor shall have the authority to examine the agency's use of state funds.
     §304A-     Patents, copyrights, and other rights.  Any patents, copyrights, inventions, discoveries, or other rights arising from agency activities shall belong to the agency and shall be subject to such policies or rules as the board of governors may adopt.
     §304A-     Annual report.  The Hawaii science, technology, and innovation agency shall submit an annual report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session.  The report shall include an explanation of facility maintenance and other functions and activities undertaken with state funds in the previous fiscal year."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
UH Hilo; Hawaii Community College; Science and Technology
 
Description:
Establishes the Hawaii Science, Technology, and Innovation Agency through a collaboration between UH Hilo and Hawaii Community College.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
