HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2884
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SPECIAL PURPOSE REVENUE BONDS TO ASSIST THE HAWAII MEDICAL CENTER.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds and declares that the health and safety of Hawaii residents is greatly jeopardized by the recent closures of two Oahu hospitals operated by the Hawaii Medical Center.  Therefore, the issuance of special purpose revenue bonds under this Act is in the public interest and for the public health, safety, and general welfare.
     SECTION 2.  Pursuant to part II, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the department of budget and finance, with the approval of the governor, is authorized to issue special purpose revenue bonds in a total amount not to exceed $1,000,000, in one or more series, for the purpose of assisting the Hawaii Medical Center, a Hawaii not-for-profit corporation, and its not-for-profit subsidiaries, including but not limited to the Hawaii Medical Center West, to finance the continued operation of its health care facilities.  The legislature hereby finds and determines that the activities and facilities of the Hawaii Medical Center constitute a project as defined in part II, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and the financing thereof is assistance to a not-for-profit corporation that provides health care facilities to the general public.
     SECTION 3.  The special purpose revenue bonds and the refunding special purpose revenue bonds issued under this Act shall be issued pursuant to part II, chapter 39A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, relating to the power to issue special purpose revenue bonds to assist not-for-profit corporations that provide health care facilities to the general public.
     SECTION 4.  The department of budget and finance is further authorized to issue, from time to time, refunding special purpose revenue bonds authorized in such principal amounts as the department shall determine to be necessary to refund the special purpose revenue bonds authorized in section 2, and to refund special purpose revenue bonds authorized in this section, regardless of whether the outstanding special purpose revenue bonds or refunding special purpose revenue bonds have matured or are the subject of redemption or whether the refunding special purpose revenue bonds shall be bonds for the multi-project programs described in section 2.  In making this determination, the department shall comply with federal law relating to the exemption from federal income taxation of the interest on bonds of the nature authorized by this section.
     SECTION 5.  The authorization to issue special purpose revenue bonds under this Act shall lapse on June 30, 2015.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 
 
 
                        

 
Report Title:
Special Purpose Revenue Bonds
 
Description:
Authorizes the issuance of special purpose revenue bonds to assist the Hawaii Medical Center in financing the capital costs related to its operation.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
