HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2846
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA DAY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Barack Hussein Obama was born on August 4, 1961, in Honolulu, Hawaii.  He attended Punahou School, excelling in basketball and graduating with academic honors in 1979.  Barack Obama enrolled at Columbia University and then Harvard Law School, where he graduated magna cum laude in 1991 and was the first African-American president of the Harvard Law Review. 
     After law school, Barack Obama practiced civil rights law in Chicago, Illinois, and was a community organizer.  As a community organizer, he worked to help low-income residents of Chicago's south side, assisting people in defining their mutual interests and working together to improve their lives.  As director of the Developing Communities Project, he created a job training program, a college preparatory tutoring program, and a tenant's rights organization.  As a result of his work with the community in Chicago, Barack Obama ran and won a seat in the Illinois State Senate, serving three terms.  As a legislator he continued to work for those in need, expanding health care services and early childhood education programs and creating a state earned-income tax credit for the working poor.  Subsequently from 2005-2008, Barack Obama was elected to serve as a member of the United States Senate.  Barack Obama also published two acclaimed books, Dreams From My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance and The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts of Reclaiming the American Dream. 
     In 2008, Barack Obama ran for President of the United States on a platform of hope and won a historic election to become the first African-American President of the United States.  As President, he continues to work for Americans most in need during these difficult economic times by, among other things, signing into law the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010, P.L. 111-312, and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, P.L. 111-148.  In 2009, Barack Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and accepted this honor as not only recognition for his specific achievements, but also as a call to action.
     Barack Obama personifies Hawaii to the world and has demonstrated the ideals of aloha he learned in his youth.
     The purpose of this Act is to designate August 4 of each year as President Barack Obama Day.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§8-    President Barack Obama Day.  August 4 of each year shall be known and designated as "President Barack Obama Day".  This day shall not be construed to be a state holiday."
SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
President Barack Obama Day
 
Description:
Designates August 4 of each year as "President Barack Obama Day".
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
