HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2865
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO DIABETES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to permanently establish through codification the department of health's diabetes prevention and control program, and to designate that the program shall have a director that shall lead the State's fight against diabetes.  The administration of the program and the director's salary and benefits shall be funded through special funds.  The exact special funds to be used shall be determined by the department of health each fiscal year.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
DIABETES PREVENTION AND CONTROL PROGRAM
     §   ‑1  Diabetes prevention and control program; appointments.     (a)  There is established within the department of health a diabetes prevention and control program.
     (b)  The head of this program shall be known as the director of the diabetes prevention and control program, hereinafter referred to as the director.  The director shall have professional training in the field of social work, education, public health, and other related fields; extensive direct experience in programs or services related to persons suffering from diabetes; and recent experience in a supervisory, consultative, or administrative position.  The director shall be nominated and appointed by the governor without regard to chapters 76 and 89.  The director shall be included in any benefit program generally applicable to the officers and employees of the State.
     §    ‑2  General functions, duties, and powers of the director.  The director shall have the following principal functions, duties, and powers:
     (1)  Coordinate efforts between State agencies including the department of health, State medical facilities, and other stakeholders.
     (2)  Be a conduit for cooperation and coordination between agencies and the public to make progress in the fight against diabetes.
     (3)  Serve as an advocate for diabetes programs statewide.
     (4)  Promote prevention through various means, including but not limited to early awareness programs and healthy lunches in schools.
     (5)  Report regularly to the governor regarding updates and reports on all matters of diabetes policy and programs throughout the State, and on the status of diabetes prevention.
     (6)  Make recommendations to interested agencies, the governor, and the legislature as to prevention and awareness programs.
     (7)  Serve as a media liaison for the State's diabetes awareness and coordination efforts.
     (8)  Be a presence in local media to remind the public as often as possible of the dangers of pre-diabetes and diabetes.
     (9)  Administer funds allocated for the diabetes prevention and control program; and apply for, receive, and disburse grants and donations from all sources for diabetes-related programs and services;
     (10) Adopt, amend, and repeal rules pursuant to chapter 91 as necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter;
     (11) Employ and retain such staff as may be necessary for the purposes of this chapter, in conformity with chapter 76; and
     (12) Contract for or grant such services as may be necessary for the purposes of this chapter, including master contract with other State agencies, and purchase of service agreements with appropriate agencies."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Department of Health; Diabetes Prevention and Control Program
 
Description:
Permanently establishes through codification the department of health's diabetes prevention and control program; designates that the program shall have a director who shall lead the State's fight against diabetes.
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
