HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2824
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAII-GROWN CACAO MONTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Cacao, derived from the Theobroma cacao tree, is the dried and fermented seed from which chocolate is obtained.  Cacao is native to the central and western Amazon region and is widely distributed throughout the humid tropical regions with commercial production concentrated in Brazil, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Indonesia, and Nigeria.
     The legislature finds that although the cacao industry in Hawaii is in its infancy with fewer than thirty growers and a total acreage of approximately fifty acres, this emerging Hawaii industry holds the promise of helping diversify the State's agricultural market.  The University of Hawaii's college of tropical agriculture and human resources has conducted a series of meetings, including a one-day workshop on October 23, 2008, entitled the Future of Cacao in Hawaii, that featured key stakeholders in the local cacao industry and representatives statewide to strategize on methods for positioning Hawaii in the growing cacao market.
     Cacao was first introduced to the Hawaiian islands in 1850.  The legislature recognizes that Hawaii's unique environment and tropical climate position it as the only state in the United States that can commercially grow cacao.  Hawaii, which is in close proximity to both Asia and the United States mainland, is ideally located to capture and prosper from the opportunities of a growing worldwide cacao market which currently generates $75,000,000,000 annually from an array of cacao products, such as cacao butter, which is rich in antioxidants.  Cacao is also used for medicinal and cosmetic purposes, as a stimulant similar to coffee, and as a vasodilator (blood-vessel widener) and heart stimulant.
     The legislature further finds that the cacao industry is poised to infuse the State's economy with a broad range of job opportunities and increased revenue from diversified agriculture, production, and processing in addition to research and development with the potential to attract outside funds.  Furthermore, cacao offers a propitious opportunity to develop a new industry in the growing, cultivating, processing, and shipping of Hawaii-grown cacao to the mainland United States and the rest of the world.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§8-    Hawaii-grown cacao month.  The month of February shall be known and designated "Hawaii-Grown Cacao Month" to recognize the potential of Hawaii-grown cacao to positively impact Hawaii's diversified agricultural economy.  This month is not and shall not be construed as a state holiday."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaiian-Grown Cacao Month
 
Description:
Designates February as "Hawaii-Grown Cacao Month."
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
