HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2848
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PUBLIC SAFETY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the most recent information on the use of drugs, alcohol, and tobacco reveals a disturbing rise in the use of these substances among the native Hawaiian population.  Many studies conducted both nationally and statewide show native Hawaiians to be at particularly high risk for substance abuse.  Among students in the eighth and tenth grades, native Hawaiian children rank highest among all ethnic groups in the use of these substances.  The studies also show that substance abuse starts at an early age, and if not addressed will:
     (1)  Lead to more serious offenses, which break down family structures spiritually, psychologically, socially, and economically;
    (2)  Create many health hazards and problems for and with the individual; and 
  (3)  Lead to other serious problems, such as poverty, homelessness, and a growing dependence on both legal and illegal drugs which in turn may lead to child abuse, family abuse, sexual abuse, and other serious life threatening crimes.
     The legislature finds that a pu‘uhonua, or wellness center, based on Hawaiian cultural practice will help the native Hawaiian community and the community at-large.  Unquestionably, many high risk individuals need to be cared for in a much more sensitive intervention program that will address solutions that will alleviate their problems.  The greatest potential to stem the tide of this most horrific situation lies in the creation of a pu‘uhonua comprising a culturally-based substance abuse treatment and intervention program that takes a holistic approach, based upon cultural identity and strength to get to the core, the why, of substance abuse.  The cultural practices of pule, ho‘oponopono, aloha ‘aina, mahi‘ai, la‘au lapa‘au, and aloha will help create a sensitive setting.  These cultural practices have been successful in the past, possessing the optimal potential to heal an individual.  A culturally-based pu‘uhonua will restore and maintain a better atmosphere and relationship between family, friends, community, and society.
     The legislature further finds that the site formerly used as the Kulani correctional facility in east Hawaii would be an ideal site for such a wellness center.  It is a place of deep spirituality for the Hawaiian people and, pragmatically, it has the infrastructure and historical precedent for use in sustainable living.
     The purpose of this Act is to reduce recidivism, prevent crime, and ensure long-term positive change by developing a plan to create a wellness center that reestablishes highly recognized native Hawaiian cultural practices to restore the overall well-being of individuals, families, and the native Hawaiian community.
     SECTION 2.  The department of public safety, working with ‘Ohana Ho‘opakele and other restorative justice groups, is directed to prepare a plan for the creation of a pu‘uhonua, or wellness center, on lands owned or controlled by the State, giving preference to the site formerly used as the Kulani correctional facility on the island of Hawaii.
     The department of public safety shall submit a report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013 on its findings and recommendations, including any budget requests necessary to achieve the purposes of this Act.      SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Lands; Kulani Correctional Facility
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Public Safety to plan for a model wellness center that employs native Hawaiian cultural practices on state land and to submit a report to the legislature prior to the 2013 legislative session.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
