HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2881
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO GREENWAYS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Act 233, Session Laws of Hawaii 2011, required the office of planning to develop a plan to establish a statewide system of greenways and trails and to coordinate with and seek input from the department of transportation, department of land and natural resources, and the counties.  The office of planning submitted its final report, Establishment of a Statewide Greenways System for Hawaii, to the legislature in December 2011.
     The final report stated that the community, county and state agencies, and nonprofit organizations have been participating in various plans, studies, and initiatives related to the establishment of trails, greenways, bike routes, parks, and other projects.  However, state agencies raised concerns that while the State should facilitate coordination of greenways and trails, none of the agencies felt it was appropriate for their particular program to undertake the responsibility for planning and implementation.  Counties raised concerns related to funding the projects as well as ongoing maintenance.
     The purpose of this Act is to implement the office of planning's recommendations to authorize and appropriate funds for the development of a statewide system of greenways and trails in two phases.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 225M, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§225M-      Statewide greenways and trails facilitator.  There is established within the office of planning a full-time statewide greenways and trails facilitator to implement the statewide greenways plan and facilitate greenways initiatives at the local and regional level statewide.  The facilitator shall be appointed by the director of planning without regard to chapter 76."
     SECTION 3.  (a)  The office of planning shall contract for up to two years with a consultant to develop a plan for the establishment and implementation of a statewide greenways plan.
     (b)  The development of the plan shall include:
     (1)  Identifying and involving the stakeholders and interest groups for each island in the development of the plan;
     (2)  Involving the public and stakeholders in identifying opportunities, barriers, and priority projects for each island; and
     (3)  Providing public outreach and education regarding the value of greenways and involvement in community greenways programs.
     (c)  The plan shall establish:
     (1)  A framework and implementation plan for facilitating greenways development statewide, including the establishment of state-level positions, in addition to the statewide greenways and trails facilitator, or a state-level program to support implementation;
     (2)  A plan to establish a permanent funding mechanism for greenways support at the state level; and
     (3)  A monitoring component to evaluate progress in implementing the plan.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $188,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to be allocated as follows:
     (1)  $88,000 for a full-time statewide greenways and trails facilitator established in section 2 of this Act; and
     (2)  $100,000 for a two-year contract with a consultant to develop a statewide greeways plan pursuant to section 3 of this Act.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the office of planning for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Greenways; Statewide Plan; Facilitator; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the position of Statewide Greenways and Trails Facilitator in the Office of Planning.  Directs the Office of Planning to contract with a consultant to develop a plan for the establishment and implementation of a statewide greenways plan.  Appropriates funds.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
