HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
285
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MEASUREMENT STANDARDS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to establish a weights and measurements special fund, with the intent of requiring the department of agriculture's measurement standards program to be financially self-supporting.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 486, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding to part I a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§486-     Weights and measurements special fund.  There is established the weights and measurements special fund to be administered by the board of agriculture.  All moneys received by the board of agriculture as application fees and for licenses or otherwise under this chapter shall be deposited into the special fund.  All interest earned or accrued on moneys deposited in the special fund shall become part of the special fund.  Moneys in the special fund shall be expended to cover all costs of administering this chapter, including but not limited to the costs of salaries, fringe benefits, operating expenses, equipment, motor vehicles, contracts for services, and promotional expenses.  Moneys in the special fund may be transferred to the general fund for salaries and fringe benefits of other state employees assisting in administering this chapter and other related costs.  A reserve shall be maintained in the special fund to cover contingency costs, including but not limited to accrued vacation leave, unemployment insurance, and workers' compensation."
     SECTION 3.  (a)  Between July 1, 2011, and September 30, 2011, the board of agriculture shall adopt new or amend existing rules to impose or increase fees authorized to be charged under chapter 486, Hawaii Revised Statutes, without regard to the public notice and public hearing requirements of section 91-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, or the small business impact review requirements of chapter 201M, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The board shall set the fees at amounts intended to generate sufficient revenues to pay the operation and maintenance costs of implementing chapter 486, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and central services and departmental administrative expense assessments of section 36-27 and section 36-30, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     (b)  If, by September 30, 2011, the board of agriculture has not complied with subsection (a), then the fee charged for each licensing, testing, calibration, or inspection of a measuring or other device shall be $               commencing October 1, 2011.
     (c)  Any subsequent amendments to the rules adopted or amended pursuant to subsection (a) or the fee established under subsection (b) shall be subject to all applicable provisions of chapter 91 and chapter 201M, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $               or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for transfer into the weights and measurements special fund as seed capital for the special fund.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 19.  There is appropriated out of the weights and measurements special fund the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the measurement standards program and for reimbursement to the general fund for the seed capital appropriated in section 4.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Weights and Measurements Special Fund
 
Description:
Establishes the weights and measurements special fund.  Requires the board of agriculture to adopt or amend rules to impose or increase fees authorized to be charged under chapter 486, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  Makes appropriations.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
