HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2843
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE EMERGENCY AND BUDGET RESERVE FUND.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the national and global economic crisis that began in the second half of 2008 caused significant economic problems in numerous industries in the State, including the airline, cruise ship, tourist, and construction industries.  An increasing number of Hawaii businesses statewide, from the agricultural sector to the medical-services sector, have been forced to lay off large numbers of employees.  Financial uncertainty has historically led to fewer visitor arrivals and lower hotel occupancy rates, resulting in layoffs and reductions in employee hours.
     Over the past few years, difficult economic times and declining tax revenues have resulted in budget cuts for all state services.  State departments have been asked to lower their budget proposals by up to twenty per cent.  These cuts jeopardize the safety net of basic human services, health, and education needs for Hawaii's residents and families.  While all of Hawaii's residents will be affected by the situation, gap group families and families closest to the poverty line will suffer the most.
     Pursuant to Act 304, Session Laws of Hawaii 1999, the legislature established the emergency and budget reserve fund as a temporary supplemental source of funding for the State in times of emergency, economic downturn, or unforeseen reduction in revenues.  As set forth in section 328L-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes, specific purposes for the fund include maintaining levels of programs determined to be essential to public health, safety, welfare, and education.  Act 304 also included certain prohibitions on appropriations from the emergency and budget reserve fund.  Appropriations for the following purposes are specifically prohibited:
     (1)  To meet expenses of the legislature;
     (2)  To provide for salary adjustments for officials appointed pursuant to article V, section 6 or article VI, section 3 of the state Constitution and for others whose salaries are directly related to salaries of these officials; and
     (3)  To fund cost items in any collective bargaining contract.
     The legislature finds that expenditures from the emergency and budget reserve fund are needed to meet the conditions of emergency, economic downturn, and unforeseen reduction in revenues that the State currently faces.  Further, the legislature finds that the appropriation in this Act is consistent with the purposes of the emergency and budget reserve fund.
     Therefore, given the ongoing economic crisis, the purpose of this Act is to appropriate moneys from the emergency and budget reserve fund of the State to maintain the levels of social service programs relating to child abuse and neglect that are essential to the public welfare.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the emergency and budget reserve fund of the State of Hawaii the sum of $200,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, for services offered by or contracted through the department of human services relating to child abuse and neglect.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Emergency and Budget Reserve Fund; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates moneys from the emergency and budget reserve fund to DHS for child abuse and neglect social services.  Effective 07/01/2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
