HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2883
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MAKAHA VALLEY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Makaha Valley is a major watershed on the Waianae coast.  Runoff from this watershed flows into streams, which can result in flooding.  Heavy rains clog the valley, which overflows the rainwater into the surrounding area and accumulates in the lower valley.
     A devastating landslide occurred in November 1996, and after six hours of heavy rain, two converging waterfalls sent rocks and mud down the mountainside and overwhelmed a ten-foot-high rock retaining wall.  Rocks and mud surged through an upper level parking lot at the Makaha Valley Tower complex, buried or swept away approximately sixty cars, and flooded the first floor of the building.  Officials estimated that in a two-hour period, the storm had caused millions of gallons of water to flow down the mountainside.
     Over the years, the Makaha Valley area has experienced flooding.  More recently in December 2008, the eighteen-hole champion golf course in Makaha closed its seventh hole due to flood damage.
     It is not possible to do a federal flood control study because Makaha Valley does not include federal land.  Although a Waianae watershed management plan was prepared for the Honolulu board of water supply, a study focused specifically on Makaha Valley is vital to identify specific recommendations for the control of storm drainage throughout the study area to reduce recurring flooding to residences and businesses in the area.
     The purpose of this Act is to authorize the department of land and natural resources to conduct a flood study for Makaha Valley.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of land and natural resources shall conduct a flood study for Makaha Valley on the island of Oahu.  The flood study shall include at least the following:
     (1)  Specific recommendations for the control of storm damage throughout the study area to reduce repetitive flooding to residences and businesses in the area;
     (2)  A cost-benefit analysis of the recommendations proposed;
     (3)  Identification and evaluation of the desired, intended, and possibly unintended effects of the recommendations;
     (4)  A timetable for the implementation of the recommendations; and
     (5)  Any other issues deemed necessary or relevant by the chairperson of the board of land and natural resources.
     (b)  The department of land and natural resources shall submit a written report of findings and recommendations, including any necessary proposed legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for a flood study for Makaha Valley.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of land and natural resources for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Makaha Valley; Flood Study; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Land and Natural Resources to conduct a flood study on Makaha Valley.  Appropriates funds.  Effective July 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
