HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2812
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TOURISM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that there is a proliferation of organized tourism activities that utilize agricultural and conservation zoned lands within the State that have not been evaluated with regard to the appropriateness or environmental impact that such activities may have on a particular site.
     The purpose of this Act is to provide for the evaluation of tourism activities conducted on agricultural or conservation zoned lands, by requiring the board of land and natural resources to establish an ecotourism permit program to fulfill the policies set forth by the Hawaii state planning act, as outlined in section 226-13(b)(2), Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 195D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§195D-A  Ecotourism permit program.  (a)  There is established in the department of land and natural resources an ecotourism permit program to require ecotourism operators to meet guidelines established by the department for the health, safety, and protection of the environment, including compliance with chapter 343, as may be necessary.
     (b)  A valid ecotourism permit shall be a prerequisite for any ecotourism operator to acquire a business license to operate in the State.
     (c)  Any operator of an ecotourism operation that was in existence in this State prior to the effective date of this Act shall obtain an ecotourism permit no later than December 31, 2017.
     (d)  The department may charge a reasonable fee for a permit issued under this section.  All revenues collected pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited into the environmental activities special fund established under section 195D-B.
     (e)  For the purposes of this section, "ecotourism" means a low impact or small scale alternative to standard commercial tourism involving visiting fragile, pristine, or protected areas.
     (f)  The department shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to implement the purposes of this section.
     §195D-B  Environmental activities special fund.  (a)  There is established an environmental activities special fund to be administered by the department and into which shall be deposited the following:
     (1)  Appropriations by the legislature to the special fund;
     (2)  Gifts, donations, and grants from public agencies and private persons;
     (3)  All proceeds collected by the department derived from ecotourism permit program fees pursuant to section 195D-A; and
     (4)  All interest earned or accrued on moneys deposited in the fund.
     (b)  The department shall expend the moneys as follows:
     (1)  Not more than ten per cent for administrative costs; and
     (2)  The remainder equally divided between the division of conservation and resources enforcement and the department of Hawaiian home lands."
     SECTION 3.  In codifying the new sections added by section 2 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Ecotourism Permit Program
 
Description:
Establishes an ecotourism permit program that requires ecotourism operators to meet guidelines established by DLNR prior to obtaining a business license.  Establishes the environmental activities special fund to be administered by DLNR.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
