HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
2804
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MILITARY FUNERAL HONORS FOR HAWAII GOVERNORS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that an appropriate funeral tribute should be provided to deceased governors of the State of Hawaii in the absence of federal military funeral honors or funeral honors provided by veteran organizations.       Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to ensure the provision of an honor guard detail for the burial of a governor of the State of Hawaii on behalf of a grateful citizenry and in recognition of the governor's service as commander-in-chief of the military forces of the State of Hawaii.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 121, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§121-    Military funeral honors program; established; funeral honors duty.  (a)  There is established the military funeral honors program that shall provide military funeral honors for the burial of State of Hawaii governors, including former governors.  The military funeral honors program shall be administered by the adjutant general, as defined in section 121-7.
     (b)  Military funeral honors under this section shall consist of an honor guard detail, which shall be performed by not less than two members of the Hawaii national guard, selected by the adjutant general, and shall, at a minimum, consist of a ceremony that includes the folding and presenting of the national flag of the United States to the next of kin and the playing of the bugle call commonly known as Taps by a bugler, if available, or by electronic recording.
     (c)  The adjutant general may:
     (1)  Order a member of the Hawaii national guard to funeral honors duty in accordance with this section.  That member shall receive an allowance of $100 for any day on which a minimum of two hours of funeral honors duty is performed.  Members of the Hawaii national guard ordered to funeral honors duty in accordance with this section are considered to be in the active service of the State for all purposes except for pay; and
    (2)   Provide support for other authorized providers who volunteer to participate in a funeral honors detail conducted for a governor; provided that the support shall be limited to transportation, reimbursement for transportation, expenses, materials, and training.
    (d)   If the adjutant general determines that Hawaii national guard personnel are not available to perform military funeral honors in accordance with this section, the adjutant general may authorize another appropriate organization to provide one or more of its members to perform those honors and, subject to appropriations for that purpose, shall authorize the payment of a $100 stipend to the organization."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Military Funeral Honors; Hawaii Governor
 
Description:
Authorizes military funeral honors for Hawaii governors.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
