HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
314
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO DISASTER PREPAREDNESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
     §    -1  Definitions.  As used in this chapter:
     "Commission" means the disaster preparedness commission.
     "Director" means the director of the office of disaster preparedness.
     "Disaster" means any natural or human-caused catastrophe, the occurrence of which is unanticipated or difficult to predict, that results in significant property damage, agricultural loss, hardship, suffering, psychological or physical injury, or loss of life within the state.
     "Natural hazard" means hurricane, storm, flood, tsunami, tidal wave, wind-driven water, earthquake, volcanic activity, volcanic smog or vog, lava flow, rockslide, earthslide, fire, or other naturally occurring emergency.
     "Vog" means the substance created when sulfur dioxide and other volcanic gases combine and interact chemically in the atmosphere with oxygen, moisture, dust, and sunlight over a period of time to form a visible haze.
     §    -2  Office of disaster preparedness established.  There is established in the department of           the office of disaster preparedness.  The director of the office of disaster preparedness shall be nominated and with the advice and consent of the senate, appointed by the governor.  The director shall serve for a period of six years and thereafter until a successor is appointed.  The salary of the director shall be set at a rate no greater than $           a year, and shall not be diminished during the director's term of office unless by general law applying to all salaried officers of the State.  If the director dies, resigns, becomes ineligible to serve, or is removed or suspended from office, the first assistant to the director shall become the acting director until a new director is appointed for a full term.
     §    -3  Duties of the director.  (a)  The director shall develop a comprehensive disaster preparedness plan for the State.  The disaster preparedness plan shall include:
     (1)  The identification of natural hazards;
     (2)  The designation of natural hazard impact zones;
     (3)  Priorities for natural hazard mitigation;
     (4)  Policies, requirements, and incentives to mitigate the consequences of natural hazards, to be incorporated into rules such as county building codes, land use policies, and retrofitting incentives such as tax credits; and
     (5)  Response plans to disasters that will best minimize costs and protect residents and visitors to the state, their interests, possessions, and pets, including plans to ensure the reliability of communication networks and power supplies for major state airports, health care facilities, disaster shelters, and other essential services.
     (b)  The director shall report annually to the governor and the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session on the status of the disaster preparedness plan and shall include any necessary proposed legislation.
     §    -4  Disaster preparedness commission established; selection of advisory committees.  (a)  There is established a disaster preparedness commission within the department of            for administrative purposes only.  The commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the governor in accordance with section 26-34, except as provided in this chapter, as follows:
     (1)  One member selected by the governor;
     (2)  One member selected by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (3)  One member selected by the president of the senate;
     (4)  Four members selected by the mayors of the counties Hawaii, Maui, Kauai, and the city and county of Honolulu, each of whom shall select one member; and
     (5)  One member to represent the judiciary, as selected by the chief justice.
Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the commission shall filled in the same manner as the original appointment.  The commission shall select one of its members to serve as chairperson.  No member of the commission shall receive any compensation for commission services; provided that members shall be allowed necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
     (b)  The commission shall advise and assist the director in developing a comprehensive disaster preparedness plan for the State.  The commission's duties in this regard shall include:
     (1)  Gathering information about past disasters that have occurred in the state; and
     (2)  Establishing advisory committees to provide technical and other support to the director."
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to establish and operate the office of disaster preparedness and the disaster preparedness commission, including hiring necessary staff.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of                 for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Disaster Preparedness Plan; Natural Disasters; Natural Hazard
 
Description:
Establishes the Office of Disaster Preparedness and a Disaster Preparedness Commission to develop a disaster preparedness plan for the State that includes the identification of natural hazards and impact zones, disaster mitigation policies, incentives, and response plans.  Appropriates funds.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
