HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
323
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PHARMACISTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 461, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§461-     Prescriptive authority for registered pharmacists.  (a)  The board shall grant prescriptive authority to qualified registered pharmacists and shall designate the requirements for registered pharmacists related to prescriptive authority.  The board shall determine the exclusionary formulary for qualified registered pharmacists who are granted prescriptive authority.
     (b)  The department of commerce and consumer affairs shall establish a joint formulary advisory committee composed of:
     (1)  Three persons licensed as pharmacists and appointed by the board;
     (2)  Two persons licensed in medicine by the Hawaii medical board and appointed by the Hawaii medical board;
     (3)  One representative of the University of Hawaii John A. Burns school of medicine appointed by the dean of the University of Hawaii John A. Burns school of medicine; and
     (4)  One representative from a school of pharmacy.
The joint formulary advisory committee shall recommend the applicable formulary for persons recognized under this section.  The board shall consider the recommendations of the joint formulary advisory committee in adopting the formulary.  The appropriate working relationship with licensed physicians shall be reflected in rules adopted by the board in accordance with chapter 91.
     (c)  The board shall establish advanced pharmacology requirements for prescriptive authority relating to education, experience, and national certification pursuant to rules adopted in accordance with chapter 91.
     (d)  Registered pharmacists shall be considered qualified if they have met the requirements of section 461-5(a), and have met the advanced pharmacology requirements for initial prescriptive authority pursuant to rules adopted by the board.  Only qualified registered pharmacists authorized to diagnose, prescribe, and institute therapy or referrals of patients to health care agencies, health care providers, and community resources and, only as appropriate, to the practice specialty in which the registered pharmacist is qualified, may prescribe and administer over the counter and legend drugs, and controlled substances pursuant to this chapter and to chapter 329; provided that a registered pharmacist shall not request, receive, or sign for professional controlled substance samples."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Pharmacists; Prescriptive Authority
 
Description:
Provides prescriptive authority to pharmacists pursuant to licensing by the board of pharmacy.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
