HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
347
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PUBLIC SAFETY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the most recent information on the use of drugs, alcohol, and tobacco reveal a disturbing rise in the use of these substances among the native Hawaiian population, and in particular, by native Hawaiian youth.  In fact, among students in the eighth and tenth grades, native Hawaiian children rank highest among all ethnic groups in the use of these substances.
     The legislature further finds that multiple health and social problems, including poverty, crime, homelessness, and family violence, are linked to an increased use of both legal and illegal substances.  The department of human services has noted that up to eighty-five per cent of adults involved in the child protective services system have serious substance abuse problems.  Further, parents and adult caregivers who are substance abusers may also place their children at risk for substance abuse.
     The greatest potential to stem the tide of this most alarming situation lies in culturally based substance abuse treatment and intervention programs that take a holistic approach based upon cultural identity, spirituality, and strength to address the core reasons for substance abuse, and to heal from within.
     The legislature finds that a pu‘uhonua, or wellness center, would be based on the Hawaiian paradigms of ho‘oponopono (to make right) and aloha ‘aina (caring for the land).  Ho‘oponopono is a focused approach to problem solving and a way to restore and maintain a person's relationships with family and community.  Aloha ‘aina, with its core of sustainable living, connects a person to the world around the person.
     The legislature further finds that the site formerly used as the Kulani minimum security prison in East Hawaii would be an ideal site for such a wellness center.  It is a place of deep spirituality for the Hawaiian people, and, pragmatically, it has the infrastructure and historical precedence for use in sustainable living.
     SECTION 2.  The department of public safety, working with Ohana Ho‘opakele and other restorative justice groups, is directed to prepare a plan for the creation of a pu‘uhonua, or wellness center, on lands owned or controlled by the State, giving preference to the site formerly used as the Kulani correctional facility on the island of Hawaii.
     The department of public safety shall report on its findings and recommendations, including any budget requests necessary to achieve the purposes of this Act, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Safety; Kulani Correctional Facility
 
Description:
Requires the PSD to plan for a model wellness center to be built in East Hawaii.  Report to legislature in 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
