HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
342
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII PUBLIC PROCUREMENT CODE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 103D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to part II to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§103D-     Consulting services contracts; annual report.  (a)  The state procurement office shall maintain records documenting the employment of persons pursuant to contracts for consulting services entered into by state agencies.  No later than one hundred eighty days after the end of each fiscal year, the state procurement office shall submit to the governor and the legislature a report summarizing the following information for each state agency:
     (1)  The number of contracts entered into for consulting services during the previous fiscal year;
     (2)  The name and address of each contractor;
     (3)  The total dollar value of each contract;
     (4)  The consulting services performed under each contract;
     (5)  Whether competitive bidding was used in awarding each contract;
     (6)  The number of contract employees performing consulting services;
     (7)  The types of services the contract employees provide; and
     (8)  The number of hours the contract employees worked and their total compensation under the contract.
     (b)  For the purposes of this section, a "contract for consulting services" means any contract that a state agency enters into for analysis, evaluation, research, training, data processing, computer programming, engineering, environmental health and mental health services, accounting, auditing, paralegal, legal, or similar services.
     (c)  The report required under subsection (a) shall be a government record for purposes of disclosure under chapter 92F.  However, in disclosing the report, the state official or agency making the disclosure shall redact the name and social security number of any individual contract employee that is included in the document.
     (d)  All state agencies shall require all contractors, including subcontractors, that provide consulting services for state purposes pursuant to a contract, to submit an annual employment report for each contract for services that includes, for each employment category within the contract:
     (1)  The number of employees employed to provide services under the contract; and
     (2)  The number of hours the employees work and the employees' total compensation under the contract.
Employment reports shall be submitted to the state agency that awarded the contract and shall be available for public inspection and copying.  However, in disclosing an employment report, the state agency making the disclosure shall redact the name and social security number of any individual contract employee that is included in the document.
     §103D-     Active procurement contracts; annual report.  (a)  The state procurement office shall maintain records concerning active procurement contracts of more than $50,000.  No later than one hundred eighty days after the end of each fiscal year, the state procurement office shall submit to the governor and the legislature a report that includes the following information:
     (1)  A listing of contracts subtotaled by state agency and type of goods or service, including:
         (A)  The contractors' names;
         (B)  Dollar value of the contracts;
         (C)  State agencies that awarded the contracts; and
         (D)  Expenditures made on each contract and by which agencies during the previous fiscal year and life to date, citing contract category codes and source selection method;
     (2)  The frequency of contracts awarded during the previous fiscal year, arranged by the number of bids or proposals, and the source selection method;
     (3)  A summary report listing:
         (A)  The total number of contracts awarded for the previous fiscal year and the total year-to-date expenditures for all contracts, with subtotals arranged by state agency and major contract category including, but not limited to, consultant, construction, equipment, grants, leases, miscellaneous services, printing, repayment agreements, intergovernmental agreements, and goods; and
         (B)  A comparison of contracts arranged by source selection method, number of contracts, contract amounts, and year-to-date expenditures; and
     (4)  For each contract for services:
         (A)  The number of employees, arranged by employment category within the contract, employed to provide services under the contract;
         (B)  The number of hours the employees work; and
         (C)  The employees' total compensation under the contract.
     (b)  The report required under subsection (a) shall be a government record for purposes of disclosure pursuant to chapter 92F and shall be available for public inspection and copying.  However, in disclosing the report, the department or the state official disclosing the report shall redact the name and social security number of any individual contract employee that is included in the document."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii Public Procurement Code; Disclosure Requirements of State Contracts
 
Description:
Requires the state procurement office to submit annual reports regarding: (1) contracts for consulting services entered into by state agencies; and (2) active procurement contracts of more than $50,000.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
