HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
358
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HYBRID BICYCLES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the rising cost of petroleum-derived fuels has caused people worldwide to seek alternative modes of transportation that are less dependent on petroleum-derived fuels.  Traditional bicycles, those powered solely by human power, are a healthy and clean alternative to vehicles that are powered by internal combustion engines.  However, traditional bicycles that are powered solely by human muscle power may not be an attractive transportation alternative, particularly for commuters who have relatively long distances to travel.
     Advancements in technology have made it possible to design and manufacture bicycles with electric motors and batteries to supplement or to fully drive bicycles, making it possible for riders to cover longer distances.  Hybrid bicycles incorporating new technology are very similar in size and weight to traditional bicycles, making hybrid bicycles a viable transportation alternative for many people.  The legislature notes that the popularity of hybrid bicycles is rising throughout Asia and increasing on the European continent, and it is anticipated that interest in hybrid bicycles will continue to increase.
     As part of state policy to explore transportation alternatives and reduce dependence on imported fuels, the legislature finds that traditional and hybrid bicycles are consistent with this policy and increasing bicycle use would help advance the goals of reducing our dependency on petroleum-based fuels and promote energy diversity.
     The purpose of this Act is to clarify the definition of bicycle to include electric motor bicycles for purposes of county vehicular taxes and the statewide traffic code, and to clarify the specifications of bicycles that may be transported on public buses.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 291C, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§291C-     Bicycles carried on public buses.  Buses used in public transportation systems may transport bicycles that meet the following specifications only:
     (1)  Wheel base no longer than forty-four inches;
     (2)  Tires that are not wider than 2.3 inches in width;
     (3)  Wheel diameters of twenty inches or larger; and
     (4)  Total weight of not more than fifty-five pounds."
     SECTION 3.  Section 249-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending the definition of "bicycle" to read as follows:
     ""Bicycle" means every device propelled [solely] either by human power or by electric motor upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels sixteen inches in diameter or greater, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels."
     SECTION 4.  Section 291C-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending the definition of "bicycle" to read as follows:
     "Bicycle" means [every]:
     (1)  A vehicle propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, and including any vehicle generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels except a toy bicycle[.]; or
     (2)  A vehicle as described in paragraph (1), with an electric motor to supplement human pedal power or to power the vehicle entirely."
     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Transportation; Hybrid Bicycles; Vehicular Tax; Traffic Code
 
Description:
Clarifies the definition of bicycle to include electric motor bicycles for purposes of county vehicular taxes and the statewide traffic code.  Specifies type of bicycles to be allowed to be transported on public buses.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
