HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
360
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SCHOOL FUNDING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 302A-1303.6, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§302A-1303.6  Weighted student formula.  (a)  Based upon recommendations from the committee on weights, the board of education, not less than annually, shall adopt a weighted student formula for the allocation of moneys to public schools that takes into account the educational needs of each student.  The department, upon the receipt of appropriated moneys, shall use the weighted student formula to allocate funds to public schools[.]; provided that the department shall not allocate funds appropriated for categorical programs to augment funding for the weighted student formula.  Principals shall expend moneys provided to the principals' schools.  This section shall only apply to charter schools for fiscal years in which the charter schools elect, pursuant to section 302B-13, to receive allocations according to the weighted student formula.
     (b)  For purposes of this section, "categorical program" means a state-funded program that promotes a specified purpose or service providing opportunities for student enrichment apart from programs or services funded through the weighted student formula."
     SECTION 2.  Section 302B-13, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§302B-13  Weighted student formula.  (a)  Notwithstanding section [[]302B-12[]] and beginning September 1, 2006, charter schools shall elect whether to receive allocations according to the department's weighted student formula adopted pursuant to section 302A-1303.6; provided that:
     (1)  All charter schools, as a group, with each local school board being accorded one vote, shall elect, by greater than two-thirds agreement among the local school boards, whether to receive allocations through the department's weighted student formula; provided that the nonprofit entity that governs more than one conversion charter school may cast one vote representing each school it governs;
     (2)  Any election by charter schools to receive department allocations, or not to receive allocations, through the department's weighted student formula shall be made by September 1 of each even-numbered year, and the election shall apply to the fiscal biennium beginning July 1 of the following year; provided that the appropriate funds shall be transferred by the department to the charter school administrative office for distribution to the charter schools; and
     (3)  The election to receive allocations, or not to receive allocations, through the department's weighted student formula shall be communicated to the department through the office.
     (b)  The charter schools, through the office, may propose to the board an alternative weighted student formula, approved [of] by more than two-thirds of the local school boards, with each local school board being accorded one vote, to be administered by the office and to apply to the per-pupil allocation for charter schools.
     (c)  Funds appropriated for categorical programs shall not be allocated to augment funding for the department's weighted student formula under subsection (a) or funding for the alternative weighted student formula under subsection (b).
     (d)  For purposes of this section, "categorical program" means a state-funded program that promotes a specified purpose or service providing opportunities for student enrichment apart from programs or services funded through the weighted student formula under subsection (a) or through the alternative weighted student formula under subsection (b)."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Weighted Student Formula; Categorical Programs
 
Description:
Prohibits the application of funds for categorical programs toward allocations made under the weighted student formula.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
