HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
363
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CONSTRUCTION SITES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Act 121, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010, created a construction site inspection task force to analyze the feasibility and potential complications of implementing a task force to investigate and inspect construction sites for unlicensed contractors, undocumented workers, and workplace safety violations, and to submit a report of its findings to the 2011 legislature.  The task force submitted its report to the legislature in November 2010, including a number of recommendations for further action.
     In addition, in 2010, the senate committee on economic development and technology and the house committee on economic revitalization, business, and military affairs convened an informal small business discussion group to address the most critical issues facing the small business sectors within Hawaii's economy.  Representatives from the Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii, construction and trades industries, community nonprofits, the agricultural sector, food and restaurant industries, retailing, the science and technology sector, the commercial transportation industry, and interested stakeholders developed a package of bills that address the most pressing problems facing Hawaii's small business community.
     The purpose of this Act is to support the findings of the small business working group by continuing the work of the construction site task force for one year and appropriating funds for the task force to complete any further recommended actions.
     SECTION 2.  Act 121, Session Laws of Hawaii 2010, is amended by amending section 3 to read as follows:
     "SECTION 3.  The construction site inspection task force shall submit [a] an initial report to the legislature no later than sixty days before the commencement of the 2011 regular session on its findings and recommendations on implementing a task force to investigate and inspect construction sites for unlicensed contractors, undocumented workers, and workplace safety violations.  The report shall include but not be limited to:
     (1)  The scope of potential cases of violations and noncompliance with tax laws that could be identified, audited, investigated, prosecuted through civil action, or referred for criminal prosecution;
     (2)  Actions and authority needed by the task force to undertake and publicize its activities;
     (3)  Recommendations for any legislation needed to accomplish the goals and to implement the recommendations of the construction site inspection task force; and
     (4)  Identification of funding streams and estimated expenditures needed in order to fully implement the recommendations of the construction site inspection task force.
     The task force shall submit a final report to the legislature no later than sixty days before the commencement of the 2012 regular session, including any specific legislation or other actions required to implement the recommendations in the initial report."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the continued work of the construction site task force.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of commerce and consumer affairs for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Construction Site Task Force; Appropriation
 
Description:
Continues the work of the construction site task force for one year; requires final report; appropriates funds for the task force to complete any further recommended actions.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
