HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
373
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ECONOMIC RECOVERY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 132, S.D. 1 (2009), established a task force to determine the economic contributions of the construction industry in Hawaii and to develop a series of proposals for state actions to preserve and create new jobs in the local construction industry.  This Act implements one of the task force's proposals in conjunction with the Abercrombie administration's support for state actions to create new jobs in Hawaii's construction industry.
     In addition, in 2010, the senate committee on economic development and technology and the house committee on economic revitalization, business, and military affairs convened an informal small business discussion group to address the most critical issues facing the small business sectors within Hawaii's economy.  Representatives from the Chamber of Commerce of Hawaii, construction and trades industries, community nonprofits, the agricultural sector, food and restaurant industries, retailing, the science and technology sector, the commercial transportation industry, and interested stakeholders developed a package of bills that address the most pressing problems facing Hawaii's small business community.
     The purpose of this Act is to support the findings of the small business working group and the recommendations proposed by the construction industry task force to provide exemptions from statutes relating to procurement and rulemaking to allow the State to expedite the implementation or expansion of programs, services, and benefits that are instrumental to the economic success of the State.  In doing so, however, it is also the purpose of this Act to strike a balance between expedited procedures and necessary accountability and transparency.
     SECTION 2.  Section 103D-302, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
     "(c)  Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given, affording a reasonable time before the date set forth in the invitation for the opening of bids.  The policy board shall adopt rules which specify:
     (1)  The form that the notice is to take;
     (2)  What constitutes a reasonable interim between publication and bid opening; and
     (3)  How notice may be published, including publication in a newspaper of general circulation, notice by mail to all persons on any applicable bidders mailing list, publication by any public or private telecommunication information network, or any other method of publication it deems to be effective[.];
provided that an invitation for bids shall be made by public notice made in a printed publication or electronic format that is accessible statewide for a period not to exceed fifteen days."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Construction Task Force (2010); Procurement; Bid Notice Requirements
 
Description:
Clarifies requirements for adequate public notice of an invitation for bids and request for proposals.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
