HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
395
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TUITION WAIVERS IN THE UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII SYSTEM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that there is a need to require the University of Hawaii system to provide higher education tuition waivers to all enrolled students who are native Hawaiian, as defined in section 10-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     Native Hawaiian students comprise approximately twenty-six per cent of Hawaii's public school population and more than eighty-five per cent of those native Hawaiian students finish high school.  However, while about half of all native Hawaiian high school graduates go on to attend college, native Hawaiians have the lowest college graduation rates of all ethnic groups in Hawaii.  Of those who are able to attend college, far fewer actually graduate with a college degree than students from any other ethnic group in the State.  According to the University of Hawaii's institutional research office, native Hawaiians account for only fourteen per cent of the total University of Hawaii student population, which is a figure that includes all native Hawaiians attending the system's three four-year and seven two-year campuses.  Further, while more than eighty per cent of the University of Hawaii system's non-native-Hawaiian students return for a second year of college, the percentage of native Hawaiian students returning to college for a second year is nearly ten per cent lower.
     The low college matriculation and retention rates of native Hawaiians throughout the University of Hawaii system seriously impact the ability of native Hawaiians to complete college and earn a degree.  Nationwide, more native Hawaiians have dropped out of college than have earned either a two-year associate or four-year baccalaureate degree.  According to the 2000 United States census, even though twenty-five per cent of all native Hawaiians have earned some college credits, most have not completed their undergraduate degrees, and only fifteen per cent of all native Hawaiians have earned at least a bachelor's degree.
     The statistics are even more troubling for native Hawaiians attempting to attain the highest academic degrees in their fields, including master's, professional, and doctorate degrees. Only three and two-tenths per cent of native Hawaiians statewide have earned a graduate degree of any kind, compared with eight and four-tenths per cent of all Hawaii residents and eight and nine-tenths per cent of the total United States population. Further, only three and six-tenths per cent of the current doctoral candidates at the University of Hawaii are native Hawaiian and nearly seventy per cent of them do not receive any type of financial aid or tuition waivers.
     The academic stress of earning a college degree is dramatically increased for many native Hawaiian students by high levels of economic stress.  Statistically, Hawaiians attending the University of Hawaii are, on average, far more affected by negative economic indicators than students from other ethnic groups.  For example, native Hawaiian students who do complete their degrees take, on the average, a full year longer to do so than students of other ethnic groups and many native Hawaiian students must work full- or part-time jobs while attempting to complete their college degrees.  This slower-than-average completion rate is due primarily to the consequences of native Hawaiians' poor access to available socio-economic resources, combined with their ongoing need to produce income for themselves and their families and Hawaii's high cost of living.
     The low numbers of native Hawaiians with college and professional degrees seriously affects the ability of Hawaii's indigenous people to participate in the State's higher education system as professors, deans, administrators, and policy makers.  At the University of Hawaii at Manoa, only four per cent of all faculty positions are held by native Hawaiians and less than one per cent of permanently tenured positions are held by native Hawaiians.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the University of Hawaii to provide higher education tuition waivers for all enrolled native Hawaiian students.  This academic and economic support can have far-reaching positive consequences for the State as a whole.  As more native Hawaiians are able to earn college degrees, more native Hawaiians can pursue the highest levels of academic and professional achievement.  Through their participation in networks of civic responsibility in the professional, academic, business, and other arenas, native Hawaiian graduates of the University of Hawaii system will be able to contribute more effectively to the economic and social health of the State of Hawaii and of the native Hawaiian peoples.  Furthermore, providing tuition waivers to all of its native Hawaiian students can serve as an important instrument by which the university gives concrete expression to, and fosters trust concerning, the State's responsibility to its indigenous people.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 304A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part II to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§304A-     Tuition waivers for native Hawaiians and Hawaiians.  Any law to the contrary notwithstanding, the board  of regents or its designated representatives shall grant a  waiver of all tuition to each and every student enrolled at any of the university system's ten campuses who is native Hawaiian  or Hawaiian as defined in section 10-2; provided that a  student's possession of a card issued by the office of Hawaiian affairs identifying the student as a person included in the  Hawaiian registry under section 10-19 shall constitute  conclusive proof that the student is native Hawaiian or  Hawaiian."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
By Request
 

 
Report Title:
University of Hawaii
 
Description:
Grants tuition waivers to native Hawaiian students at the University of Hawaii.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
