HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
40
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HIGHWAY SAFETY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 286-107, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsections (b) and (c) to read as follows:
     "(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), an applicant for a renewal of a driver's license under this section, or the reactivation of an expired license under section 286-107.5(a), shall appear in person before the examiner of drivers and the examiner of drivers shall administer such physical examinations as the state director of transportation deems necessary to determine the applicant's fitness to continue to operate a motor vehicle[.]; provided that the examination for an applicant who is seventy-six years of age or older at the time of renewal or reactivation shall include the actual demonstration of ability to exercise ordinary and reasonable control in the operation of a motor vehicle pursuant to section 286-108(a)(4).
     (c)  Any person except a person who is seventy-six years of age or older who holds a category (1), (2), or (3) license issued under this part who is unable to appear in person before the examiner of drivers to apply for a renewal of the driver's license, [may,] if the person is not disqualified from renewing the license under subsection (a) except as provided under subsection (h), may apply for a renewal by mail.  The applicant's request to have the license renewed by mail must be received by the examiner of drivers within ninety days after the expiration of the license or it shall be treated as an application for reactivation of an expired license under section 286-107.5.  The examiner of drivers [shall], upon receipt of the request, shall furnish the applicant with all necessary forms and instructions.  An application for renewal made pursuant to this subsection shall be accompanied by a statement from a licensed physician or physician assistant certifying that the applicant was examined by the licensed physician or physician assistant not more than six months prior to the expiration date of the applicant's license and that the applicant was found by the examination to have met the physical requirements established by the state director of transportation for the renewal of licenses.  The application for renewal shall also be accompanied by:
     (1)  A notarized statement of the applicant certifying that the applicant does not possess any valid license to operate the same or similar category or categories of motor vehicles, issued by another licensing authority (unless the license is concurrently surrendered); and
     (2)  Such other information as may be required by the examiner of drivers that is reasonably necessary to confirm the identity of the applicant and the applicant's fitness to continue to operate a motor vehicle."
     SECTION 2.  Section 286-107.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Unless revoked or suspended, and except as provided in subsection (b), all drivers' licenses expired under section 286-106 may be reactivated by the licensee in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth for the renewal of licenses under section 286-107(b).  No person seeking reactivation of an expired license under this subsection shall be required to undergo reexamination of the person's driving skills under section 286-108[.], except as provided under section 286-107(b) for persons who are seventy-six years of age or older.  The examiner of drivers shall require the holder of an expired license to pay a reactivation fee of $5 for each thirty-day period, or fraction thereof, that has elapsed after the ninety-day grace period."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011; and shall apply to any person seeking a driver's license renewal after June 30, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Motor Vehicle Drivers; Driver's License Renewal; Road Tests for Seniors
 
 
Description:
Requires an individual who is 76 years of age or older to renew the individual's driver's license every 2 years and to pass a road test prior to receiving a renewed or reactivated driver's license.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
