HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
413
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO DENTAL SERVICES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 431, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part I of article 10A to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§431:10A-    Contracts with providers for dental services.  No contract between an accident and health or sickness insurer and a dentist for the provision of dental services to patients may require that a dentist provide dental services to subscribers at a fee set by the accident and health or sickness insurer unless the dental services are covered services under the applicable subscriber agreement.
     "Covered services" means services reimbursable under the applicable subscriber agreement, subject to any contractual limitations on subscriber benefits as may apply, including deductibles, waiting periods, or frequency limitations."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 432, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part VI of article 1 to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§432:1-    Contracts with providers for dental services.  No contract between a mutual benefit society and a dentist for the provision of dental services to patients may require that a dentist provide dental services to subscribers at a fee set by the mutual benefit society unless the dental services are covered services under the applicable subscriber agreement.
     "Covered services" means services reimbursable under the applicable subscriber agreement, subject to such contractual limitations on subscriber benefits as may apply, including deductibles, waiting periods, or frequency limitations."
     SECTION 3.  Chapter 432D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§432D-    Contracts with providers for dental services.  No contract between a health maintenance organization and a dentist for the provision of dental services to patients may require that a dentist provide dental services to subscribers at a fee set by the health maintenance organization unless the dental services are covered services under the applicable subscriber agreement.
     "Covered services" means services reimbursable under the applicable subscriber agreement, subject to such contractual limitations on subscriber benefits as may apply, including deductibles, waiting periods, or frequency limitations."
     SECTION 4.  Chapter 448D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§448D-    Contracts with providers for dental services.  No contract between a dental service organization and a dentist for the provision of dental services to patients may require that a dentist provide dental services to subscribers at a fee set by the dental service organization unless the dental services are covered services under the applicable subscriber agreement.
     "Covered services" means services reimbursable under the applicable subscriber agreement, subject to such contractual limitations on subscriber benefits as may apply, including deductibles, waiting periods, or frequency limitations."
     SECTION 5.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Dental Services; Contracts
 
Description:
Prohibits an accident and health or sickness insurer, mutual benefit society, health maintenance organization, or dental service organization from requiring a dentist who provides services to its subscribers to accept a fee set by the accident and health or sickness insurer, mutual benefit society, health maintenance organization, or dental service organization unless the services are covered under the applicable subscriber agreement.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
