HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
431
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CORRECTIONAL INDUSTRIES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 354D-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§354D-1  Finding and purpose.  The legislature finds that the number and types of programs operated by the department of public safety shall be expanded to provide a comprehensive work program for inmates.  The full development of inmate employment opportunities shall be expanded to enable correctional industries programs to operate in a cost-effective manner.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:
     (1)  Establish the correctional industries program to allow expanded industries programs to generate revenue to sustain its operation and allow for capital investment.  The program should be structured to allow for the increased involvement of correctional industries in providing specific training skills for offenders that increase their employment prospects after release;
     (2)  Develop industries that provide a maximum level of work for all qualified, able-bodied inmates;
     (3)  Provide an environment for the operation of correctional industries similar to that of a private business operation;
     (4)  Encourage cooperative training ventures between the correctional industries program and the private sector; and
     (5)  Provide for low-cost construction, renovation, and repairs of facilities, grounds, furniture, vehicles, and equipment for affordable housing, private nonprofit social service, education, and health agencies and programs."
     SECTION 2.  Section 354D-6, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  The administrator shall establish programs [that] to construct affordable housing for rental to tenants with household incomes of less than sixty per cent of the applicable area median income and provide essential products and services for each of the State's correctional facilities, for other state agencies, and for the counties, as may be required."
     SECTION 3.  Section 354D-10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  There is created the correctional industries revolving fund to be administered by the department.  All moneys collected by the department from the sale or disposition of goods and services produced in accordance with this chapter and any inmate deductions shall be deposited into the correctional industries revolving fund.  The proceeds in the correctional industries revolving fund shall be used for:  the purchase or lease of supplies, equipment, and machinery; the construction, leasing, or renovating of buildings used to carry out the purposes of this chapter; the construction of affordable housing for rental to tenants with household incomes of less than sixty per cent of the applicable area median income; the salaries of personnel necessary to administer the enterprises established in accordance with this chapter; payment of inmates for work assignments; the reimbursement of incarceration costs of the inmates related to the inmates' participation in correctional industries; and other necessary expenses; provided that the correctional industries revolving fund shall not be maintained in excess of the amount necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter."
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Correctional Industries; Affordable Housing
 
Description:
Authorizes the correctional industries program to participate in the construction of affordable housing.  Authorizes the use of correctional industries revolving fund moneys for the construction of affordable housing.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
