HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
468
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO COUNTY ETHICS COMMISSIONS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Article XIV of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii provides in pertinent part:  "Ethics commissioners shall be selected in a manner which assures their independence and impartiality."  Each member of the state ethics commission is appointed by the governor from a list of two persons nominated by the judicial council.  The Hawaii supreme court appoints members of the judicial council, which does not include legislators.  In contrast, members of the Honolulu ethics commission are appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the Honolulu city council, both of which are subject to oversight by the county ethics commission.
     The legislature further finds that, in order to effectuate article XIV of the Hawaii State Constitution, the process for selecting members of county ethics commissions should not involve persons who are subject to regulation by ethics commissions.
     The purpose of this Act is to provide standards for the selection of county ethics commissioners to ensure their impartiality and independence.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 46, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART    .  COUNTY ETHICS COMMISSIONS
     §46‑    Process for selection of county ethics commissioners.  (a)  Each county shall cause to be adopted a charter amendment for the creation of an independent body that shall select members of the county ethics commission.  Members of the independent body shall not be subject to confirmation by the county legislative body and shall not be subject to the jurisdiction of the ethics commission of their county.  To ensure minimal involvement in the process by persons over which the commission has oversight, members of each county ethics commission shall be appointed:
     (1)  From a list of nominees selected by the independent body; or
     (2)  In accordance with comparable alternative selection methods as provided by county ordinance.
     (b)  Each county shall have a selection process in place that meets the criteria for any appointment made after the effective date of this part.
     §46-    Character of county ethics commissioners.  A county ethics commissioner shall be selected on the basis of integrity, impartiality, and independence, as reflected by, among other things, the background and experiences of the person and the absence of potential conflicts of interest; provided that county ordinance may provide for additional criteria."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
County Ethics Commissions; Selection of Members
 
Description:
Provides standards for the selection of county ethics commission members to ensure their impartiality and independence.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
