HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
483
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO NURSES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to recognize advanced practice public health nurses as advanced practice registered nurses by the state board of nursing.
     The American Nurses Credentialing Center has recently changed the recognition of the advanced public health nurse as a specialty in its own right with its own credential of advanced public health nurse-board certified, replacing its prior status as a sub-specialty of nursing.  In light of this national credentialing change and the importance of population-based preventive health care and education, this Act recognizes advanced public health nurses as advanced practice registered nurses.
     SECTION 2.  Section 457-8.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Effective October 1, 2009, the board shall grant recognition as an advanced practice registered nurse to a nurse who has:
     (1)  A current, unencumbered license as a registered nurse in this State;
     (2)  An unencumbered license as a registered nurse in all other states in which the nurse has a current and active license;
     (3)  An unencumbered recognition as an advanced practice registered nurse or similar designation in all other states in which the nurse has a current and active recognition as an advanced practice registered nurse;
     (4)  Completed an accredited graduate-level education program leading to a master's degree as a certified registered nurse anesthetist, a nurse midwife, a clinical nurse specialist, [or] a nurse practitioner[;], or, effective October 1, 2011, an advanced public health nurse;
     (5)  A current, unencumbered certification of having passed a national certification examination that measures role and population-focused competencies and is recognized by the board;
     (6)  Maintained continued competencies through recertification in role and population-focused competencies through a national certification program recognized by the board;
     (7)  Acquired advanced clinical knowledge and skills preparing the nurse to provide direct care to patients through a significant educational and practical concentration on the direct care of patients;
     (8)  Demonstrated a greater breadth of knowledge, a greater synthesis of data, greater complexity of skills and interventions, and greater role autonomy than demonstrated by a registered nurse;
     (9)  Been educationally prepared to assume responsibility and accountability for health promotion and maintenance and to assess, diagnose, and manage patient problems through the use and prescription of pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic interventions;
    (10)  Acquired clinical experience of sufficient depth and breadth to reflect the intended license; and
    (11)  Paid the appropriate fees."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses; Qualifications
 
Description:
Grants advanced public health nurses recognition as advanced practice registered nurses as of 10/01/2011.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
