HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
498
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO WASTE DISPOSAL.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds there are an estimated five hundred thousand to one million used vehicle tires generated in Hawaii each year, and many of those tires are being improperly dumped on the side of roads and at illegal dump sites, spoiling the natural beauty of the islands and causing environmental damage, including fires, increased mosquito breeding, and contamination of the air, water, and soil.  There are reports that authorized tire collection services, who collect used tires from tire retailers and tire wholesalers for a fee, are failing in their duty to properly dispose of tires collected at authorized tire recycling facilities.  Instead, they are wrongfully keeping the moneys and dumping the tires at illegal dump sites.  The legislature finds this practice to be incompatible with the intent of the Used Motor Vehicle Tire Recovery law, chapter 342I, Hawaii Revised Statutes.  The improper disposal of used tires can be addressed by motivating collectors of used tires to ensure delivery of those tires to authorized tire recycling facilities by enabling authorized tire recyclers to issue payment for used tires received by the tire recycling facility through a voucher system.  
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of health to develop and implement a voucher system for the collection of used tires that establishes authorized tire recycling facilities as the point of payment and requires authorized tire collection services to deliver all collected tires to an authorized tire recycler before they may be reimbursed for their collection services.
     SECTION 2.  The department of health shall develop and implement a voucher system for the collection of used tires by January 1, 2012, that shall include:
(1)  Requiring authorized tire collection services to dispose of all used tires collected from all persons at an authorized tire recycling facility;   
(2)  Requiring the exchange of vouchers instead of cash money prior to the delivery of used tires at an authorized tire recycling facility; and
(3)  Authorizing tire recyclers to issue payment to authorized collection services upon receipt of used tires from the special account in the environmental management fund, described in section 342I-29, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 3.  The department of health is authorized to establish fees, charges, and redemption values for used tires to ensure the sustainability of the voucher system.
     SECTION 4.  The department of health shall submit a report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012 that shall include:
(1)  Its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, relating to the development and implementation of a voucher system for the collection and proper disposal of used tires;
(2)  The status of the progress in developing and implementing a voucher system for the collection of used tires; and
(3)  Funding requirements for the administration of a voucher system for the collection of used tires and proposed appropriate sources of the funding.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the special account in the environmental management special fund described in section 342I-29, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012, for the development and implementation of a voucher system for the collection and recycling of used vehicle tires. 
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.  
     SECTION 6.  There is appropriated out of the special account in the environmental management special fund described in section 342G-63, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012, for the development and implementation of a voucher system for the collection and recycling of used vehicle tires. 
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act. 
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

Report Title:
Vehicle tires; Waste; Disposal; Recycle.
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Health to develop and implement a voucher system for the collection of used vehicle tires.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
