HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
499
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MEDICAL ASSISTANCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part II to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346-     Medical assistance; noncitizens.  (a)  The department shall provide covered noncitizens with medical assistance for the following services:
     (1)  Dialysis and chemotherapy and other cancer treatments that are medically necessary, as that term is described in section 432E-1.4;
     (2)  At least ten physician inpatient and twelve physician outpatient visits for each benefit year.  Medical assistance under this paragraph shall not include visits for dialysis or chemotherapy treatments under paragraph (1); and
     (3)  At least eight drug prescriptions per month;
provided that medical assistance shall not be provided if the benefits mandated under this section are replaced by benefits provided under federal law.
     (b)  As used in this section, "covered noncitizen" means a legal resident of Hawaii, age nineteen or older, who:
     (1)  Is not a United States citizen;
     (2)  Is a legal permanent resident who arrived on or after August 22, 1996;
     (3)  Would, as a citizen of the United States, be eligible for benefits under the State's medicaid programs, including QUEST; and
     (4)  Is not eligible for federally funded medical assistance due to restricted eligibility rules imposed by Title XXI of the Social Security Act, the Personal Responsibility and Work Reconciliation Act of 1996, or the Compact of Free Association Act of 1985, P.L. 99-239, the Compact of Free Association between the United States and the Government of Palau, P.L. 99-658, or any other provision of federal law denying medical assistance to non-immigrants who are citizens of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, or the Republic of Palau."
     SECTION 2.  Section 432E-1.4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  For contractual purposes, a health intervention shall be covered if it is an otherwise covered category of service, not specifically excluded, recommended by the treating licensed health care provider, and determined by the health plan's medical director to be medically necessary as [defined] described in subsection (b).  A health intervention may be medically indicated and not qualify as a covered benefit or meet that definition of medical necessity.  A managed care plan may choose to cover health interventions that do not meet the definition of medical necessity."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for medical assistance for covered noncitizens.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on January 1, 2012; provided that section 3 shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________

 
Report Title:
Medical Assistance; Noncitizens; Pacific Islanders
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Human Services to provide medical assistance for dialysis, chemotherapy, and other cancer treatments, inpatient and outpatient physician visits, and drug prescriptions for immigrants and noncitizens from the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, or the Republic of Palau.  Effective January 1, 2012.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
