HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
501
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MEMORIALS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  (a)  There is established the coastal memorials task force within the department of land and natural resources for administrative purposes.  The task force shall consist of the following eleven members:
(1)  The chairperson of the board of land and natural resources or the chairperson's designee;
(2)  The director of transportation or the director's designee;
(3)  A member of the house of representatives, designated by the speaker of the house of representatives;
(4)  A member of the senate, designated by the senate president;
(5)  One representative from each county, designated by the respective county's mayor;
(6)  A member of the community as designated by the speaker of the house of representatives;
(7)  A member of the community, designated by the president of the senate; and
(8)  A member of the community, designated by the governor.
     The members of the task force shall elect a chairperson from among its membership.
     (b)  The coastal memorials task force shall:
(1)  Review and evaluate the practice of erecting coastal memorials with respect to the safety of beach users;
(2)  Develop standards to regulate the practice of erecting coastal memorials;
(3)  Consider the size, placement, and duration of coastal memorials in its review; and
(4)  Report its findings and recommendations to the legislature, including any proposed legislation, no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (c)  Members of the coastal memorials task force shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses, including travel expenses necessary for the performance of their duties.
     (d)  The legislative reference bureau shall assist the coastal memorials task force in preparing its findings, recommendations, and proposed legislation; provided that the chairperson of the task force shall submit the necessary information therefor to the legislative reference bureau for drafting no later than November 1, 2011.
     (e)  For purposes of this Act, "coastal memorials" mean impromptu structures built on public land along coastal areas of the state on occasion, to commemorate the death of another person.
(f)  The coastal memorials task force shall cease to exist on June 30, 2012.
     SECTION 2.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Coastal Memorials; Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes the Coastal Memorials Task Force to, among other things, develop standards to regulate the practice of erecting coastal memorials.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
