HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
50
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO A MEMORIAL.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The freedom and security that citizens of the United States (U.S.) enjoy today are direct results of the sacrifices and continued vigilance of the U.S. armed forces over the course of our nation's history.  The sacrifices of the members of the U.S. armed forces have preserved the liberties of this nation that have made it unique in the world community.  Members of the U.S. armed forces engaged in the Persian Gulf War from August 2, 1990, to February 28, 1991, that culminated in the liberation of Kuwait from Iraq.  The U.S. air-and-land conflict, known as Operation Desert Storm, began on January 17, 1991, and lasted through April 11, 1991.  Operation Iraqi Freedom was a military campaign led by U.S. troops that began on March 20, 2003, and lasted through August 31, 2010.  It was later named Operation New Dawn on September 1, 2010.  Also known as the "War in Afghanistan", Operation Enduring Freedom is an ongoing war effort that began on October 7, 2001.  On July 24, 1994, Hawaii dedicated the Korean and Vietnam War Memorial on the grounds of the State Capitol.  Thus, it is both fitting and necessary for the State to give tangible and visible recognition of the sacrifices and contributions of veterans from Hawaii who served in the Persian Gulf War, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and Operation New Dawn.
     SECTION 2.  The office of veterans' services, with the assistance of the department of accounting and general services and the department of defense, is directed to develop a plan to establish a memorial honoring the veterans of the Persian Gulf War, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and Operation New Dawn on the grounds of the State Capitol near the Korean and Vietnam War Memorial.
     A public hearing shall be held to receive comments or input from interested organizations and residents.
     SECTION 3.  The office of veterans' services, department of accounting and general services, and department of defense are further directed to submit a report of their findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than January 1, 2012.      SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Memorial; Persian Gulf War; Operation Desert Storm; Operation Iraqi Freedom; Operation Enduring Freedom; Operation New Dawn
 
Description:
Directs the Office of Veterans' Affairs, Department of Accounting and General Services, and Department of Defense to establish a memorial to the veterans of the Persian Gulf War, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Enduring Freedom, and Operation New Dawn.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
