HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
511
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO KUPUNA CARE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The State's kupuna care program (kupuna care) was established in 1999 to address the needs of the aging population and the issues arising from those needs.  The program is home- and community-based, designed to address the increasing need for affordable long-term care and the desire of the elderly to age in place.  Kupuna care is an alternative to traditional long-term care options, which are often more costly, and the program fills an important gap in assistance for the elderly in Hawaii.
     Along with an aging population come issues relating to disease.  Several of kupuna care's core services, including adult day care, attendant care, and personal care, address problems brought on by diseases and other health-related issues.  Among the more common diseases that Hawaii's elderly battle are Alzheimer's disease and related dementia.  The Alzheimer's Association, Aloha Chapter, estimates that twenty-eight thousand Hawaii residents suffer from Alzheimer's disease and related dementia.  Further, the Alzheimer's Association reports that Alzheimer's disease is an illness of long duration, often lasting eight to twelve years.  Six out of ten people with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia will wander during the course of their illness.  Wandering can be dangerous and sometimes fatal, and causes stress among caregivers and family members.
     The legislature finds that there are registration services, such as MedicAlert + Safe Return, through which individuals who wander can be more easily located, identified, and returned safely to their families.  This and similar services also aid police and other first responders in the safe return of elders who are found but who cannot remember essential contact information.
     The purpose of this Act is to support the kupuna care program by appropriating funds as a grant to the Alzheimer's Association, Aloha Chapter, to support and promote participation in elder registration services in the State.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant, pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to the Alzheimer's and Related Disorders Association, Inc., dba Alzheimer's Association, Aloha Chapter, to:
     (1)  Support and promote an elder wanderer's registration service, as a component of the kupuna care program, in the State to protect individuals with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia;
     (2)  Conduct targeted outreach throughout the State to increase enrollment in the State of Hawaii in the national wanderer's registry and offer scholarships and subsidies to low-income families, as defined by the United States Department of Health and Human Services' 2010 poverty guidelines for Hawaii, who want to enroll in the registry;
     (3)  Conduct annual training for first responders and other community members to increase awareness and provide ongoing education on best practices for search and rescue efforts for people with dementia; and
     (4)  When authorized by the family, issue customized updates and information through social media to provide alerts to community members and assist with search and rescue efforts.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Kupuna Care; Wanderer's Registry; Appropriation; Kupuna Caucus
 
Description:
Appropriates funds as a grant to the Alzheimer's Association, Aloha Chapter, to support and promote participation in elder registration services to protect individuals with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
