HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
510
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HEALTH.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the department of health and the department of human services are responsible for licensing, certifying, and monitoring several types of care facilities.  Although the departments perform inspections to ensure a standard of quality of these facilities using state moneys, the public currently cannot easily access the information contained in the inspection reports.  The legislature finds that the public would benefit from greater access to information on the quality and conditions of care facilities in Hawaii.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of health and the department of human services to make available to the public, free of charge, information collected from the departments' inspections of care facilities.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 321, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part I to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§321‑    Inspections; public notice.  (a)  Beginning January 1, 2013, the department of health shall post on its website electronic copies of reports for all inspections it performs for the following state-licensed care facilities:
     (1)  Adult day health centers;
     (2)  Developmental disabilities domiciliary homes as defined in section 321‑15.9;
     (3)  Developmentally disabled adult foster homes;
     (4)  Long-term care facilities as defined in section 349‑21(f); and
     (5)  Special treatment facilities as defined in section 334‑1.
     (b)  Each report shall be posted on the department of health's website within       days of the conclusion of each inspection and shall include but not be limited to the following information:
     (1)  The date of the inspection;
     (2)  A description of violations of relevant state laws or rules;
     (3)  Plans of correction and the status of corrective actions in response to any violations; and
     (4)  Other information regarding the quality and conditions of the facilities as the department of health deems appropriate in informing the public of their care options."
     SECTION 3.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part XIV to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346‑    Inspections; public notice.  (a)  Beginning January 1, 2013, the department of human services shall post on its website electronic copies of reports for all inspections it performs on adult day care centers and community care foster family homes as that term is defined in section 346‑331.
     (b)  Each report shall be posted on the department of human services' website within       days of the conclusion of each inspection and shall include but not be limited to the following information:
     (1)  The date of the inspection;
     (2)  A description of violations of relevant state laws or rules;
     (3)  Plans of correction and the status of corrective actions in response to any violations; and
     (4)  Other information regarding the quality and conditions of the facilities as the department of human services deems appropriate in informing the public of their care options."
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Kupuna Caucus; DOH; DHS; Care Facilities; Inspections
 
Description:
Requires the department of health and the department of human services to post on their respective websites reports of all inspections of care facilities by January 1, 2013.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
