HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
526
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HIGH TECHNOLOGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii's technology and defense-related industries have shown strong growth and potential for expansion.  By 2012, these industries on Oahu will have an estimated one hundred seventy-six thousand jobs, with more than fifty-one thousand of these being newly-created positions.  Thus, the State's workforce needs to be trained to meet the growing demand for highly-skilled, highly-specialized labor in areas such as high technology, defense-aerospace, business, and finance.  The State's ability to meet this demand will help shape the future quality of life for many of Hawaii's residents.
     The legislature further finds that the development of an employment anchor facility, such as a high technology park, will be crucial for preparing Hawaii's current and future workforce to adequately deal with the challenges of working in high technology industries.  Demand for an employment anchor facility from local technology businesses and major out-of-state defense and aerospace contractors who wish to establish businesses on Oahu is already significant and growing.  The development of an employment anchor facility in the form of a high technology park is an important first step in creating and sustaining a vibrant high technology industry in the state.
     The purpose of this Act is to support Hawaii's high technology industry by:
     (1)  Requiring the department of business, economic development, and tourism to consult with the high technology development corporation to plan for the establishment of a high technology park on the island of Oahu, and work with the department of land and natural resources to identify public or private lands that may be acquired for the park; and
     (2)  Appropriating funds for infrastructure to build the park.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall work with the department of land and natural resources to identify appropriate lands, either public or private, on Oahu that may be acquired for the high technology park.
     (b)  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall consult with the high technology development corporation to plan for the establishment of a high technology park on Oahu; provided that the plans shall include provisions for the high technology development corporation to manage and oversee the park's operations in cooperation with other government agencies and private entities.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for land acquisition, planning, design, equipment, and construction costs related to the infrastructure for a high technology park on Oahu.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of business, economic development, and tourism for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon approval; provided that section 3 shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
High Technology Park
 
Description:
Requires the Department of Business, Economic Development, and Tourism to work with the department of land and natural resources to identify appropriate lands for a high technology park on Oahu and to consult with the high technology development corporation to plan for the establishment of the high technology park.  Makes appropriation.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
