HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
534
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO KUHIO PARK TERRACE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the State will soon embark on a $316,000,000 redevelopment of Kuhio park terrace and Kuhio homes, two of the largest and oldest public housing properties in the State.  The redevelopment plan will include a one-for-one replacement of public housing units along with the addition of two hundred seventy-six subsidized, senior, and market-rate rental units.  The two sixteen-floor towers at Kuhio park terrace, which house five hundred seventy-two units will remain as part of the redevelopment plan.
     Across the country, however, municipalities are vacating and in some cases demolishing high rise public housing, such as Chicago's infamous Cabrini Green.  From Chicago to New Orleans, from Boston to San Francisco, the monolithic, concrete and brick buildings that often were built on the rubble of razed slums soon became the ghettoes that they were supposed to replace.  In cities like St. Louis and Philadelphia, massive buildings that were hailed by the architects as the wave of the future when they were erected less than three decades ago, today stand totally vacant, abandoned both by housing officials and tenants.
     High-rises proved totally unsuitable for housing low-income families – with too many people crowded into too little space, and without easy access to the world outside.  Elevators broke down regularly, repair and maintenance rarely keep pace with needs, and as the buildings aged, conditions deteriorated to the point that many units were unlivable.
     In Hawaii, Kuhio park terrace residents have complained for years of similar problems, resulting in a class action lawsuit filed in December 2008, against the Hawaii public housing authority, and alleging hazardous conditions and discriminatory obstacles.
     While the redevelopment plan will address many of the problems reported and issues raised by residents and others, concerns have been expressed about the renovations of the two high-rises, rather than their replacement with lower-rise facilities.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the Hawaii public housing authority to review the redevelopment project at Kuhio park terrace towers.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii public housing authority shall review the redevelopment project at Kuhio park terrace towers, and the decision to retain the high-rise towers, including:
     (1)  The plan to retain and renovate the two sixteen-floor towers at Kuhio park terrace;
     (2)  The rationale for the retention of the high-rise towers, given decisions by numerous other municipalities to replace high-rise buildings with alternative facilities;
     (3)  The differences in costs if the high-rise towers are retained or replaced with lower-rise alternatives;
     (4)  Any site restrictions, i.e., amount of land available, if the high-rise towers were replaced with lower-rise alternatives;
     (5)  How the projected twelve- to thirteen-year time frame for the entire redevelopment plan may be affected by reconsideration of the types of facilities to be constructed; and
     (6)  Any other information that may assist the authority in providing safe, secure housing for the residents.
     SECTION 3.  The authority shall report to the legislature no later than September 30, 2011, on its findings regarding the retention and renovation of the two sixteen-floor towers at Kuhio park terrace and any recommendations the authority may have for amendments to the redevelopment plan.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kuhio Park Terrace; Redevelopment Plan
 
Description:
Requires the Hawaii public housing authority to review the redevelopment project at Kuhio park terrace; requires report to the legislature no later than September 30, 2011.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
