HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
533
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  There is established in the department of education an electronic book pilot program for students in one public intermediate or middle school to be selected by the department.  The department shall provide, free of charge for the 2011-2012 school year, books presented in digital format to be read directly from the screen of a personal computer, laptop, or other portable device.
     SECTION 2.  The department of education shall select one public intermediate or middle school and may select a subset of students within that school to participate in the pilot program.  Selected students shall notify the department in writing of their commitment to participate in the pilot program for the school year or their election to not participate in the program.  Participating students shall use designated electronic books, downloadable to personal computers, laptops, or other portable devices, for the duration of the school year, instead of printed textbooks.  The department, in consultation with officials of the selected schools, shall determine other rules and selection criteria for students and the textbooks to be used as part of the pilot program.
     SECTION 3.  During the school year, if a student or a student's parents or guardians find that the student's participation in the pilot program is detrimental to the student's learning and desire to end participation in the program, the student or the student's parents or guardians may end the student's participation without penalty.  Any student who drops out of the program shall return any distributed materials or publically-owned electronic devices to the department of education in good working condition and shall not be allowed to participate in the program for the remainder of the school year.
     SECTION 4.  The department of education shall submit a written report on the implementation and effectiveness of the electronic book pilot program to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2013 regular session.  The report shall include findings on the costs and experience gained from the pilot program, and recommendations for implementing an electronic book system for all public schools that address anticipated problems and provide an estimate of the costs involved.
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the planning and implementation of an electronic book pilot program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Department of Education; Electronic Book Pilot Program; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes and appropriates funds for an electronic book pilot program for one public intermediate or middle school to be selected by the department of education.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
