HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
540
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
PROPOSING AN AMENDMENT TO THE HAWAII CONSTITUTION RELATING TO TALLYING VOTES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  In Hawaii State AFL-CIO v. Yoshina, 935 P.2d 89 (Haw. 1997), the Hawaii Supreme Court held that within the meaning of article XVII, section 2, of the Hawaii State Constitution, the term "ballots cast" includes blank ballots and over votes.  The purpose of this Act is to propose an amendment to article XVII, section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii to exclude blank ballots, over votes, or otherwise spoiled ballots from the total number of votes counted for the purposes of article XVII, section 2.
     SECTION 2.  Article XVII, section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii is amended to read as follows:
"CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION
     Section 2.  The legislature may submit to the electorate at any general or special election the question, "Shall there be a convention to propose a revision of or amendments to the Constitution?"  If any nine-year period shall elapse during which the question shall not have been submitted, the lieutenant governor shall certify the question, to be voted on at the first general election following the expiration of such period.
ELECTION OF DELEGATES
     If a majority of the [ballots cast] votes tallied upon such a question be in the affirmative, delegates to the convention shall be chosen at the next regular election unless the legislature shall provide for the election of delegates at a special election.
     Notwithstanding any provision in this constitution to the contrary, other than Section 3 of Article XVI, any qualified voter of the district concerned shall be eligible to membership in the convention.
     The legislature shall provide for the number of delegates to the convention, the areas from which they shall be elected and the manner in which the convention shall convene.  The legislature shall also provide for the necessary facilities and equipment for the convention.  The convention shall have the same powers and privileges, as nearly as practicable, as provided for the convention of 1978.
MEETING
     The constitutional convention shall convene not less than five months prior to the next regularly scheduled general election.
ORGANIZATION; PROCEDURE
     The convention shall determine its own organization and rules of procedure.  It shall be the sole judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its members and, by a two-thirds vote, may suspend or remove any member for cause.  The governor shall fill any vacancy by appointment of a qualified voter from the district concerned.
RATIFICATION; APPROPRIATIONS
     The convention shall provide for the time and manner in which the proposed constitutional revision or amendments shall be submitted to a vote of the electorate; provided that each amendment shall be submitted in the form of a question embracing but one subject; and provided further, that each question shall have designated spaces to mark YES or NO on the amendment.
     At least thirty days prior to the submission of any proposed revision or amendments, the convention shall make available for public inspection, a full text of the proposed amendments.  Every public library, office of the clerk of each county, and the chief election officer shall be provided such texts and shall make them available for public inspection.  The full text of any proposed revision or amendments shall also be made available for inspection at every polling place on the day of the election at which such revision or amendments are submitted.
     The convention shall, as provided by law, be responsible for a program of voter education concerning each proposed revision or amendment to be submitted to the electorate.
     The revision or amendments shall be effective only if approved at a general election by a majority of all the votes tallied upon the question, this majority constituting at least fifty per cent of the total vote cast at the election, or at a special election by a majority of all the votes tallied upon the question, this majority constituting at least thirty per cent of the total number of registered voters.
     The provisions of this section shall be self-executing, but the legislature shall make the necessary appropriations and may enact legislation to facilitate their operation."
     SECTION 3.  The question to be printed on the ballot shall be as follows:
     "Shall blank ballots, over votes, and otherwise spoiled ballots be excluded when tallying votes on whether to convene a constitutional convention?"
     SECTION 4.  Constitutional material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New constitutional material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This amendment shall take effect upon compliance with article XVII, section 3, of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Constitutional Amendment; Constitutional Convention; Vote Tally
 
Description:
Proposes an amendment to the Constitution of the State of Hawaii to exclude blank ballots, over votes, and otherwise spoiled ballots from the total number of votes counted for the question of whether a constitutional convention shall be convened.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
