HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
57
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO NUCLEAR ENERGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that despite the availability of locally based alternative energy sources, Hawaii remains dependent on imported fossil fuels for eighty per cent of its energy generation.  As a result, electric rates in Hawaii are one hundred to two hundred per cent higher than the national average and the local economy is highly susceptible to volatile external energy market forces.
     The legislature finds that nuclear energy is a safe and efficient alternative to fossil fuels and that nuclear power generation facilities already exist in Hawaii in the form of the United States Navy's nuclear-powered vessels berthed at Pearl Harbor.  Many areas throughout the continental United States, Europe, and Asia produce electricity with nuclear energy.  France, for example, has constructed fifty-eight nuclear power facilities that generate nearly ninety per cent of the country's electricity.  Just as in these other areas, the opportunity exists in Hawaii to safely use nuclear energy to generate electricity and substantially reduce the State's dependence on expensive imported fossil fuels.
     The purpose of this Act is to direct the department of business, economic development, and tourism to develop the proposed legislation and rules necessary to establish an appropriate permitting process to enable the construction and operation of nuclear energy generation facilities in Hawaii.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 196, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§196-     Nuclear energy generation facilities.  (a)  No later than January 1, 2014, the department shall develop procedures for licensing, siting, and permitting the construction and operation of nuclear energy generation facilities in the State.  These procedures shall take into account:
     (1)  The requirements of article XI; section 8 of the Constitution of the State of Hawaii;
     (2)  The health and safety of the residents of the State;
     (3)  Compliance with the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-438), as amended;
     (4)  Regulations adopted by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; and
     (5)  The preservation and conservation of the natural environment of the State.
     (b)  The department shall develop procedures for the disposal, storage, or reprocessing of radioactive waste material produced in nuclear energy generation facilities in the State.
     (c)  The department shall seek input and recommendations from other county, state, and federal agencies in the development of procedures under this section.
     (d)  The director shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 necessary for the implementation of this section.
     (e)  As used in this section:
     "Department" means the department of business, economic development, and tourism.
     "Director" means the director of business, economic development, and tourism.
     "Nuclear energy generation facility" or "facility" means a new nuclear fission power plant or facility located in the State with the capacity to produce from nuclear fissile material at least two hundred megawatts of electricity.  The term includes any of the following associated with the initial permitting and construction of the facility:
     (1)  The land parcel on which the facility is situated;
     (2)  Any nuclear energy production structure or equipment;
     (3)  Any energy transmission line from the facility to a public utility's electricity transmission or distribution system;
     (4)  Any on-site infrastructure; and
     (5)  Any on-site building, structure, other improvement, or equipment necessary for the production of electricity, transmission of the electricity, or any accommodation for employees of the facility."
     SECTION 3.  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall issue progress reports to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular sessions of 2012 and 2013, and a final report to the legislature of its findings, recommendations, proposed legislation, and proposed rules no later than twenty days prior to convening of the regular session of 2014.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Nuclear Energy
 
Description:
Directs the department of business, economic, development, and tourism to develop a permitting process for nuclear energy generation facilities in Hawaii.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
