HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
584
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO COUNTY ZONING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 46-1.5(5)(D), Hawaii Revised Statutes, delegates to counties the authority to enact zoning ordinances.  The legislature finds that form-based code zoning provides an alternative to current zoning practices.  Form-based code zoning uses physical form, rather than the separation of uses, as the organizing principle for the codes.  Form-based codes address the relationship between building facades and the public realm, the form and mass of buildings in relation to one another, and the scale and types of streets and blocks.  The regulations and standards in form-based codes are presented in both words and clearly drawn diagrams and other visuals.  They are keyed to a regulating plan that designates the appropriate form and scale, and therefore the character of development, rather than only distinctions in land use types.
     Form-based code zoning typically implements a community plan to achieve a community vision based on time-tested forms of urbanism.  Ultimately, the quality of development outcomes depends on the quality and objectives of the community plan as implemented by form-based code zoning.
     The purpose of this Act is to create a temporary working group to study whether the counties should implement form-based code zoning in place of or as an alternative to existing zoning practices.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is created a working group on form-based code zoning to examine and make recommendations as to whether the counties should implement form-based code zoning in place of or as an alternative to existing zoning practices.  The temporary working group shall be established under the department of business, economic development, and tourism for administrative purposes.  Members of the task force shall serve without compensation and without reimbursement for expenses.
     (b)  Members of the temporary working group on form-based code zoning shall include:
     (1)  The director of the department of business, economic development, and tourism, as chair;
     (2)  One representative from the planning department of each county to be designated by the mayor of each respective county;
     (3)  The chairperson of the land use commission; and
     (4)  The director of the office of planning, or the director's designee.
     (c)  The temporary working group on form-based code zoning shall report its findings and recommendations to the legislature, the mayor of each county, and the council chair of each county no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (d)  The working group on form-based code zoning shall dissolve after filing its report pursuant to this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
County Zoning
 
Description:
Creates a temporary working group to study whether form-based code zoning should be implemented by the counties in place of or as an alternative to zoning practices.  Report to legislature, county mayors, and chairs of county councils.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
