HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
583
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO LAND USE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature acknowledges that the land use commission, established under section 205-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is the state agency responsible for determining the boundaries of state land use districts and for reviewing petitions to amend land use district boundaries that involve certain lands.  Section 205-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, provides specific criteria for the land use commission to consider when reviewing petitions for the reclassification of land use district boundaries.  The criteria listed in section 205-17, Hawaii Revised Statutes, include conformity to state and county plans and district standards and impacts of the proposed reclassification upon important natural systems or habitats; valued cultural, historical, or natural resources; natural and agricultural resources important to Hawaii's economy; commitment of state funds and resources; and opportunities for employment, economic development, and housing.  The legislature finds that according to the United States Census Bureau, Hawaii's population was 1,360,301 in 2010, which is 12.3 per cent higher than the census population in 2000.  Furthermore, the United States Census Bureau also indicates that Hawaii had the fifteenth highest population density in the nation in 2010 at 211.8 people per square mile.  The legislature acknowledges that Hawaii's increasing population and population density continue to present challenges and produce cumulative effects in areas such as affordable housing, transportation and infrastructure, environmental impacts, availability of natural resources, and other issues.
     The legislature finds that a review of the existing criteria that the land use commission uses during its decision making process would help ensure that the commission considers not only the immediate impacts of reclassifications, but also the cumulative and long-term impacts of its reclassification decisions.
     SECTION 2.  The office of planning shall convene a task force to review all requirements under chapter 205, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and make recommendations to ensure that the land use commission considers the cumulative and long-term impacts of all pending and proposed development requests during its review of reclassification petitions.  The task force shall consist of thirteen members as follows:
     (1)  One representative of the office of planning;
     (2)  One representative of each of the county planning departments who has experience in implementing Smart Growth strategies;
     (3)  One representative from each county council to be appointed by the chairperson of each respective county council;
     (4)  One member of the senate to be appointed by the president of the senate;
     (5)  One member of the house of representatives to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (6)  One representative of a non-profit organization that works directly with land use planning issues to be appointed by the president of the senate; and
     (7)  One representative of a for-profit organization that works directly with land use planning issues to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.
The task force shall be situated in the office of planning for administrative purposes and the task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including any implementing legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.  The legislative reference bureau shall assist the task force in drafting its recommendations and any proposed legislation.
     SECTION 3.  Members of the task force shall not be compensated, but shall be reimbursed for expenses, including travel expenses, necessary for the performance of their duties.
SECTION 4.  The task force shall cease to exist after June 30, 2012.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Land Use Commission; Decision Making Criteria; Task Force
 
Description:
Requires the office of planning to convene a task force to review all requirements under chapter 205, Hawaii Revised Statutes, and make recommendations to ensure that the land use commission considers the cumulative and long-term impacts of all pending and proposed development requests during its review of reclassification petitions.  Requires the task force, with the assistance of the legislative reference bureau, to report its findings to the legislature.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
