HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
606
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO MILK LABELING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that advances in food processing techniques have drastically increased the shelf life of certain foods; however, these processes may also affect the nutritional value of important food staples such as milk. 
     The legislature also finds that although milk is required to have the "best by" date, this does not inform the consumer of the length of time that has transpired since the milk was processed.  Hawaii consumers clearly need additional information to evaluate the freshness of milk.  The legislature finds that labeling milk with the pasteurization date or packaging date will better inform consumers as to which products are the freshest, and enabling consumers to choose the freshest milk will promote the public health.
     The legislature further finds that ensuring the quality and freshness of Hawaii products is consistent with the State's island fresh campaign, which encourages consumers to support local farmers by buying locally-produced products.  Providing consumers with the milk pasteurization date will raise the quality profile of milk pasteurized and processed in Hawaii.
     The purpose of this Act is to require milk offered for sale in Hawaii to be labeled with the date of pasteurization or the date the milk was packaged for distribution or sale.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 321, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§321‑    Milk labeling; date of pasteurization or packaging.  (a)  Any beverage product that contains one hundred per cent by weight of milk and is pasteurized, distributed, or offered for sale in this State shall be labeled with the date that the contents were:
     (1)  Pasteurized; or
     (2)  Packaged for distribution or sale, if no portion of the beverage product has been pasteurized.
The label shall clearly indicate that the date refers to the date of pasteurization or the date of packaging for distribution or sale, as applicable.
     (b)  For purposes of this section:
     "Milk" means all fresh milk or fresh milk constituents to be used in fluid form for human consumption, including pasteurized milk, cream, half-and-half, whole milk, skim milk, buttermilk, flavored milk, flavored skim milk, reconstituted or  recombined milk, and filled milk, as those terms are used or defined in section 157-1.
     "Pasteurized" means that the beverage product was processed to produce "pasteurized milk", as that term is defined in section 157-1."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on January 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Milk; Labeling; Date of Pasteurization or Packaging
 
Description:
Requires milk beverages to be labeled with the date of pasteurization or the date of packaging.  Effective 1/1/12.
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
