HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
624
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AUTOCYCLES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 286, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new part to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"PART
AUTOCYCLES
     §286-A  Definitions. As used in this part:
     "Autocycle" means a motorized cycle that exclusively uses a motor operated by electricity, is a zero-emission vehicle, and is:
     (1)  At least sixty inches in width;
     (2)  Not more than one hundred thirty-five inches in length;
     (3)  At least one thousand pounds in unladen weight;
     (4)  Equipped with:
         (A)  Three low-pressure tires;
         (B)  A steering wheel;
         (C)  Seating for at least one person but not more than four persons;
         (D)  A fully-enclosed metal or metal-reinforced cab with glass and mirrors;
         (E)  Doors with functioning handle locks that lock;
         (F)  Headlights;
         (G)  Tail lamps;
         (H)  Brakes;
         (I)  A working horn;
         (J)  Signal lamps; and
         (K)  Seat belts.
     §286-B  Registration and licensing; fees.  (a)  The owner of an autocycle may register and license it as a motorcycle.
     (b)  In addition to the application to register the autocycle, the owner of an autocycle shall provide proof of insurance under article 10G, chapter 431.
     (c)  The fee for registering and licensing an autocycle shall be $5.
     §286-C  Rules of the road.  The operator of an autocycle that is registered and licensed under this part shall comply with and shall be subject to the same penalties for violating the rules of the road as provided under chapters 291 and 291C.
     §286-D  Operation requirements; passengers.  (a)  An operator of an autocycle shall have a valid driver's license.
     (b)  The operator and all passengers in the autocycle shall use seat belts while the autocycle is in operation.
     (c)  An operator of or passenger in an autocycle shall not be required to wear protective headgear, protective glasses, goggles, or transparent face shields.
     (d)  An operator of the autocycle shall have not more than three passengers in the autocycle.
     (e)  A child may be a passenger in an autocycle.
     §286-E  Operation limitations.  An autocycle shall not be operated on a public highway unless the autocycle can maintain speed equal to the posted speed limit of the public highway.
     §286-F  Rules.  The director may adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 for the implementation and administration of this part."
     SECTION 2.  In codifying the new sections added by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________


 
Report Title:
Autocycles
 
Description:
Authorizes the registration of autocycles as motorcycles.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
