HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
630
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Act 51, Session Laws of Hawaii 2004 (Act 51), also known as the "Reinventing Education Act of 2004", was designed to provide comprehensive education reform in Hawaii's public schools by, among other things, reducing the bureaucracy within the department of education and focusing more resources and control at the individual school level.  Among other things, Act 51 established a weighted student formula for allocating operating funds to individual public schools that uses a system of weighted characteristics affecting the relative cost of educating each student.  Act 51 also enhanced decision-making at the school level by increasing principals' budgeting authority and spending flexibility, making principals more accountable for determining methods to improve student achievement.
     Because the weighted student formula allocates school funds based on student need, there have been concerns that some schools would lose money and resources to a degree that would harm student achievement.  There have also been doubts regarding the ability of school principals to meet the increased demands and responsibilities that Act 51 places upon them, including greater control over school budgets.
     In 2006, the auditor performed a management audit of Kailua high school that provided a preliminary assessment of the ability of public schools to meet the new requirements of Act 51.  The auditor concluded in its Report No. 06-06, that stronger leadership and better management practices were needed to prepare Kailua high school for greater autonomy and responsibility for decision-making and educational outcomes under Act 51.  The report noted that "the deficiencies evident at Kailua High suggest that other Hawai'i schools may be similarly unprepared to shoulder the additional responsibility delegated by Act 51."
     According to a 2010 news report, the auditor stated that a comprehensive management audit of the department of education, including a school-by-school audit, would require significant amounts of money and time.  Therefore, the legislature finds that an audit of a single public school would be more practical and would provide an updated example of how the weighted student formula and school management under Act 51 have been working in actual practice.
     The purpose of this Act is to obtain a limited assessment of the ability of public schools to meet the school management and budgeting requirements of Act 51, by requiring the auditor to perform a financial and management audit of Kealakehe high school.
     SECTION 2.  The auditor shall conduct a financial and management audit of Kealakehe high school that, using the example of the high school, includes an evaluation of:
     (1)  The effectiveness of the weighted student formula established under section 302A-1303.6, Hawaii Revised Statutes, in allocating school funds;
     (2)  The performance of the school principal in meeting the school management responsibilities set forth in Act 51, Session Laws of Hawaii 2004, and whether principals can be reasonably expected to meet these responsibilities based on this example; and
     (3)  Any deficiencies identified in school management practices under the requirements of Act 51, Session Laws of Hawaii 2004.
     The auditor shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, at least twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the auditor to conduct a financial and management audit of Kealakehe high school.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the office of the auditor for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Kealakehe High School; Audit
 
Description:
Requires the state Auditor to conduct a financial and management audit of Kealakehe High School.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
