HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
668
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO VETERANS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The military specialty license plates program was authorized in 1992, and since that time, the counties have issued thousands of plates to eligible applicants.  This program serves as an important acknowledgement to our veterans, recognizing their sacrifice and service to our nation.
     Veteran license plates identify individuals who have provided a service to this country and are a symbol of the gratitude of the general public.  Accordingly, it is important that as many veterans categories as possible are included in the program.  Currently, the license plate options are limited and various groups of veterans not included.
     The legislature finds that a number of states have military license plate programs that are far more inclusive than Hawaii's.  For example, Idaho's selection of plates includes branch of service and the conflict that veterans served in.  Idaho also offers license plates for families that have a deceased relative who died as a result of hostile action in a combat zone.  Illinois, another state with an expansive military license plate program, offers twenty-eight plate options, including selections for various medal recipients.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a working group to examine the State's policy on military specialty license plates.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established a working group on the expansion of the military license plates program, to be placed under the office of veterans services for administrative purposes.
     (b)  The purpose of the working group on the expansion of the military license plates program shall be to explore the feasibility of providing specialty license plates for all veterans.  The working group shall meet a minimum of three times, include outreach to community veterans groups, and shall consider:
     (1)  Specific categories of veterans to be included in the program;
     (2)  Reasonable fees for the issuance of the plates, and whether certain categories of veterans should be exempt from the fees;
     (3)  Qualifications for being eligible for the program, including whether non-owners of vehicles and spouses of disabled veterans should qualify;
     (4)  Procedures for determining the design of the plates; and
     (5)  Any other relevant issues.
     (c)  The working group on the expansion of the military license plates program shall be comprised of the following members:
     (1)  The director of the office of veterans' services, or the director's designee;
     (2)  The chair of the advisory board on veterans' services, or the chair's designee;
     (3)  The chief of police, city and county of Honolulu, or the chief's designee;
     (4)  The chief of police, county of Hawaii, or the chief's designee;
     (5)  The chief of police, county of Maui, or the chief's designee;
     (6)  The chief of police, county of Kauai, or the chief's designee;
     (7)  The director of finance, county of Hawaii, or the director's designee;
     (8)  The director of finance, county of Maui, or the director's designee;
     (9)  The director of finance, county of Kauai, or the director's designee; and
    (10)  The director of budget and fiscal services, city and county of Honolulu, or the director's designee.
     (d)  The office of veterans' services shall convene the meetings of the working group; provide all administrative, technical, professional, and clerical support required by the working group; and draft and submit the report required under subsection (f).
     (e)  Members of the working group on the expansion of the military license plates program shall receive no compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed for incidental expenses, including travel costs, necessary for the performance of their duties under this Act.
     (f)  The working group on the expansion of the military license plates program shall report its findings and recommendations, including any suggested legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (g)  The working group on the expansion of the military license plates program shall cease to exist on May 15, 2012.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Veterans; Specialty License Plates; Working Group
 
Description:
Establishes a working group to explore the feasibility of providing specialty license plates for all veterans.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
