HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
670
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SPECIAL NUMBER PLATES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that special number license plates, also known as vanity license plates, are a means of self-expression.  These plates appeal to a broad spectrum of the public and are issued by every state in the country.  In 2007, the American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators conducted a survey and concluded that there are 9,700,000 vehicles in North America with personalized vanity license plates.  The sale of vanity license plates is often a significant source of revenue for state licensing agencies.
     The legislature further finds that Hawaii's current policy regarding the issuance of vanity license plates is more restrictive than other states.  Given the current economic climate, it is prudent to seek alternative methods of generating new revenue for the various counties.  Expanding the policies regarding special number plates to meet the community demand may provide such additional revenue.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a working group to examine the State's policy on special number license plates.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established a working group on the expansion of special number license plates, to be placed under the department of customer services of the city and county of Honolulu, for administrative purposes.
     (b)  The purpose of the working group on the expansion of special number license plates shall be to explore the feasibility of providing a broader spectrum of special number plates for the purpose of increasing revenues.  The working group shall meet a minimum of three times, include outreach to community groups, and shall consider:
     (1)  Specific categories of plates to be permitted;
     (2)  Reasonable fees for the issuance of the plates, and whether certain persons should be exempt from the fees;
     (3)  How the design of the plates should be determined; and
     (4)  Any other relevant issues.
     (c)  The working group on the expansion of special number license plates shall consist of the following members:
     (1)  The director of customer services of the city and county of Honolulu, or the director's designee;
     (2)  The director of finance of the county of Hawaii, or the director's designee;
     (3)  The director of finance of the county of Maui, or the director's designee;
     (4)  The director of finance of the county of Kauai, or the director's designee; and
     (5)  The chiefs of police of each county or their respective designees.
     (d)  The department of customer services of the city and county of Honolulu shall:
     (1)  Convene the meetings of the working group;
     (2)  Provide all administrative, technical, professional, and clerical support required by the working group; and
     (3)  Prepare and submit the report required under subsection (f).
     (e)  Members of the working group on the expansion of special number license plates shall receive no compensation for their services, but may be reimbursed for costs, including travel costs, necessary for the performance of their duties under this Act.
     (f)  The working group on the expansion of special number license plates shall report its findings and recommendations, including any recommended legislation, to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     (g)  The working group on the expansion of special number license plates shall cease to exist on June 30, 2012.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Special Number License Plates; Vanity Plates; Working Group
 
Description:
Establishes a working group to explore the feasibility of expanding the State's policy on special number license plates in order to increase revenue for counties.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
