HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
672
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO PHARMACISTS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 461, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§461-A  Clinical pharmacist practitioner; qualifications.  (a)  A clinical pharmacist practitioner is a licensed pharmacist in good standing who:
     (1)  Is certified by the board, in concurrence with the Hawaii medical board, to provide prescription drug therapy management, including diagnosing, prescribing, modifying, or discontinuing drug therapies, or ordering tests under the direction or supervision of a prescriber; and
     (2)  Has additional education, experience, or certification as required by the board in concurrence with the Hawaii medical board.
     (b)  A clinical pharmacist practitioner shall not request, receive, or sign for professional controlled substance samples.
     (c)  Only a pharmacist certified by the board may legally be identified as a clinical pharmacist practitioner."
     SECTION 2.  Section 461-1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new definition to be appropriately inserted and to read as follows:
     ""Clinical pharmacist practitioner" means a licensed pharmacist in good standing who meets the requirements of section 461-A."
     SECTION 3.  Section 461-4.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  In addition to any other powers and duties authorized by law, the board:
     (1)  Shall adopt, amend, and repeal rules pursuant to chapter 91, as it deems proper for the purposes of this chapter, Public Law 100-293, and 21 Code of Federal Regulations part 205;
     (2)  Shall examine, license, reinstate, and renew the licenses of qualified applicants for registered pharmacists, clinical pharmacist practitioners, and wholesale prescription drug distributors, and issue and renew permits to operate pharmacies;
     (3)  May require the inspection of any wholesale prescription drug distributor premises in the State to ensure compliance with this chapter and rules adopted under this chapter, or may require an applicant for a pharmacy license to submit a statement that the premises, including but not limited to security and sanitation, are in conformance with the board's requirements and that the applicant possesses the reference materials and technical clinical equipment and supplies as may be specified in rules adopted under this chapter; and
     (4)  May fine, suspend, or revoke any license or permit for any cause prescribed by this chapter, or for any violation of the rules adopted under this chapter, and refuse to grant or renew any license or permit for any cause which would be ground for revocation or suspension of a license or permit."
     SECTION 4.  Section 461-8, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
     "(c)  In the event that the pharmacist or clinical pharmacist practitioner has not engaged in the practice of pharmacy in this State or in another state or territory of the United States within the past five years, the board may require the pharmacist to satisfy additional requirements, as specified in rules adopted pursuant to chapter 91, to demonstrate that the pharmacist is competent to practice in this State."
     SECTION 5.  In codifying the new sections added by section 1 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Clinical Pharmacist Practitioner
 
Description:
Establishes qualifications for and provides prescriptive authority to clinical pharmacist practitioners.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
