HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
687
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE STATE COMMISSION ON FATHERHOOD.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature established the state commission on fatherhood in 2003 in recognition of the important and unique role fathers play in the lives of their children, families, and communities.  Act 156, Session Laws of Hawaii 2003, as amended by Act 148, Session Laws of Hawaii 2005, and Act 232, Session Laws of Hawaii 2006, and Act 190, Session Laws of Hawaii 2007, direct the commission to serve in an advisory capacity to state agencies to promote healthy family relationships between parents and children.  In recognition of the commission's value and the need to continue to promote and support healthy families in Hawaii, the legislature established the commission as a permanent entity within the state in 2007.
     The legislature further finds that it is necessary for the commission to hire an executive director and appropriate staff to implement its strategic plan which includes the following goals and objectives:
     (1)  Complete a statewide analysis of services available to fathers;
     (2)  Develop policy recommendations on best practices for serving fathers via state agencies and their service providers;
     (3)  Develop, support, and advocate legislation that facilitates father involvement in the lives of children;
     (4)  Operate year-round public awareness campaigns about the importance of paternal involvement in the lives of children;
     (5)  Make available to fathers and families, information, resources, and events related to effective fathering, and parenting support available;
     (6)  Implement a parent-friendly business award program;
     (7)  Raise and administer funds for the commission's work and the work of organizations it funds through grants;
     (8)  Publish an annual report on the status of fatherhood issues in Hawaii; and
     (9)  Identify and promote new laws, policies, and best practices to improve father involvement.
     The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds to support the operations of the state commission on fatherhood.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the operations of the state commission on fatherhood, including hiring an executive director and staff, establishing an office, and paying travel expenses for neighbor island commissioners.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Commission on Fatherhood; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates funds for the State Commission on Fatherhood.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
