HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
686
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the enhanced integration of technology in the classroom is one means of assisting the department of education in meeting its statewide educational goals.  Implementation of a comprehensive data system would assist the department in managing its widespread network of student achievement data and educational resources in a more efficient manner.
     The legislature further finds that the New York City Department of Education has adopted the achievement reporting and innovation system (ARIS), which provides teachers with student achievement data and instructional resources on the same information platform.  ARIS is a first of its kind innovation system that applies assessment, analytics, and reporting tools with goals of:
     (1)  Empowering educators to improve student outcomes;
     (2)  Transforming information into improved classroom practice; and
     (3)  Stimulating, capturing, validating, and disseminating innovation.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of education to implement a comprehensive data system, such as ARIS, to accelerate student learning.
     SECTION 2.  No later than August 2011, the department of education shall implement a comprehensive data system to provide educators with a consolidated view of student learning-related data and tools to collaborate and share knowledge for the acceleration of student learning.
     The department shall include information on the comprehensive data system and its effects on student learning in its annual reports on the educational accountability system, pursuant to section 302A-1004, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for implementation and management of a comprehensive data system to provide educators with a consolidated view of student learning-related data and tools to collaborate and share knowledge for the acceleration of student learning.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
DOE; Comprehensive Data System; Appropriation
 
Description:
Requires the department of education to implement and manage a comprehensive data system to provide educators with a consolidated view of student learning-related data and tools to collaborate and share knowledge for the acceleration of student learning; appropriates funds.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
