HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
691
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO YOUTH SUICIDE PREVENTION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that over four thousand youths take their lives annually in the United States, making suicide the third leading cause of death of persons between the ages of ten and twenty-four.
     In Hawaii, suicide is the second leading cause of death among persons who are fifteen to twenty-four years old.  In 2009, one out of every eight high school students reported having attempted suicide within the twelve-month period before completing a nationwide behavioral risk survey.  The rate of attempted suicides for high school students is more than double the national average.  Males are more likely than females to commit suicide, and native Hawaiian youths are the most likely ethnic group to attempt or commit suicide.
     Act 124, Session Laws of Hawaii 2007, established a youth suicide early intervention and prevention program for Hawaii.  As directed by the Act, the youth suicide early intervention and prevention program has coordinated training for law enforcement personnel, health care providers, school and University of Hawaii employees, and other persons who have contact with individuals at risk of suicide.  The program has also established the Prevent Suicide Hawaii Task Force to create public awareness for issues relating to youth suicide prevention and to build community networks concerning youth suicide prevention.  Accordingly, the purpose of this Act is to continue funding for the suicide prevention coordinator within the department of health.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the continued funding of the suicide prevention coordinator within the department of health.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for suicide prevention services within the department of education.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Teen Suicide; DOH; Suicide Prevention; Keiki Caucus; Appropriation
 
Description:
Provides for continued funding for a teen suicide prevention coordinator within the department of health and for teen suicide prevention services within the department of education.  Makes appropriations to departments of health and education.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
