HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
694
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO FISHING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  In recent years, the number of uhu and goatfish found on reefs surrounding the island of Maui has declined.  The popularity of uhu and goatfish as food fishes has led to over-harvesting on the island of Maui and has made harvesting these fishes for food difficult.
     There are eight species of uhu (family Scaridae) in Hawaii.  Also known as parrotfish, once commonly found on reefs surrounding Maui, uhu is the most prolific contributor of sand production of all Hawaiian reef fishes.
     The preferred species for human consumption are: the redlip uhu (Scarus rubroviolaceus), also known as uhu palukaluka; the stareye uhu (Calotomus carolinus), also known as ponuhunuhu; and the spectacled uhu (Chlorurus perspicillatus), also known as uhu uliuli (male) and uhu‘ahu‘ula (female).
     There are also five other types of uhu, the yellowbar uhu (Calotomus zonarchus), the bullethead uhu (Chlorurus sordidus), the regal uhu (Scarus dubius), the spinytooth uhu (Calotomus spinidens), and the palenose uhu (Scarus psittacus).  The spectacled, yellowbar, and regal uhus are endemic to Hawaii.
     There are several species of goatfish (family Mullidae) in Hawaii.  The three species most sought after as a food fish and commonly found on reefs surrounding Maui are: the white saddle goatfish (Parupeneus porphyreus), also known as kumu; the blue goatfish (Parupeneus cyclostomus), also known as moana ukali; and the double bar goatfish (Parupeneus bifasciatus), also known as munu.  This family of fishes is highly prized as a food fish and cherished by many ethnic cultures.
     Although uhu may be harvested year-round, the rules adopted by the department of land and natural resources pursuant to section 187A-5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, require a minimum length of twelve inches by measure of fork length (the distance from the fish's snout to the fork of the tail) to be legally harvested in Hawaii.  Although kumu may be harvested year-round, the kumu must have a minimum length of ten inches by measure of fork length to be legally harvested in Hawaii.  The moana ukali and munu are unregulated species and currently have no size restrictions for harvest.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish bag limits for uhu and goatfish not to exceed more than two each of kumu, moana ukali, munu, or uhu per person, per day taken for recreational, subsistence, or commercial purposes on the island of Maui.
     This Act also establishes specific exemptions and minimum size limits for all species of uhu, kumu, moana ukali, and munu taken from Maui.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 188, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§188-    Uhu; goatfish; bag limits.  (a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take, possess, or sell more than two kumu, two moana ukali, or two munu per day on Maui; provided that a commercial marine dealer may possess and sell more than two kumu, two moana ukali, or two munu with receipts issued for the purchase pursuant to section 189-11.
     (b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take, possess, or sell any kumu, moana ukali, or munu less than ten inches in length on Maui.
     (c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take, possess, or sell more than two uhu per day on Maui; provided that a commercial marine dealer may possess and sell more than two uhu with receipts issued for the purchase pursuant to section 189‑11.
     (d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take, possess, or sell any uhu less than twelve inches in length on Maui.
     (e)  The department may issue permits to engage in activities otherwise prohibited by law, in accordance with section 187A-6, or as may be otherwise authorized by law.
     (f)  As used in this section:
     "Goatfish" means the species of the family Mullidae that includes the kumu, munu, and moana ukali.
     "Kumu" means any fish known as Parupeneus porphyreus or any recognized synonym.
     "Length" means the straight line measurement from the tip of the snout to the middle of the trailing edge of the tail.
     "Maui" means the entire island of Maui, including its state marine waters.
     "Moana ukali" means any fish known as Parupeneus cyclostomus or any recognized synonym.
     "Munu" means any fish known as Parupeneus bifasciatus or any recognized synonym.
     "Sell" means to:
     (1)  Solicit and receive an order for;
     (2)  Have, keep, offer, or expose for sale;
     (3)  Deliver for value or in any other way than purely gratuitously;
     (4)  Peddle;
     (5)  Keep with the intent to sell; or
     (6)  Traffic-in the sale.
     "Take" means to fish for, catch, capture, confine, or harvest, or to attempt to fish for, catch, capture, confine, or harvest aquatic life.  The use of any gear, equipment, tool, or any means to fish for, catch, capture, confine, or harvest aquatic life, by any person who is in the water, in a vessel on the water, or on or about the shore where aquatic life can be fished for, caught, captured, confined, or harvested, shall be construed as taking.
     "Uhu" means any fish known as Scarus rubroviolaceus, Chlorurus sordidus, Chlorurus perspicillatus, Scarus dubius, Scarus psittacus, Calotomus spinidens, Calotomus zonarchus,  Calotomus carolinus, or any recognized synonym."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

Report Title:
Uhu; Goatfish; Bag Limits; Size Restrictions
 
Description:
Establishes fishing bag limits and size restrictions for uhu and goatfish taken from Maui.  Also establishes specific exemptions. 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
