HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
706
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO NATIVE HAWAIIANS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§     Native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park.  (a)  The board of trustees of the office of Hawaiian affairs and the Hawaiian homes commission shall jointly establish, with the assistance of native Hawaiian business organizations, a native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park that shall serve as an incubator and resource center for native Hawaiian entrepreneurs.
     (b)  The board of trustees and the Hawaiian homes commission, as applicable, are authorized in accordance with law to:
     (1)  Identify and seek the assistance of native Hawaiian business organizations with the potential or willingness to participate in the development of a native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park;
     (2)  Establish a loan program for native Hawaiian entrepreneurs to locate and conduct operations in Hawaii;
     (3)  Issue revenue bonds to assist in the financing of the costs of projects developed by native Hawaiian entrepreneurs and related to research, science, and technology;
     (4)  Enter into long-term leases with native Hawaiian entrepreneurs for the siting and development of research, science, and technology projects; and
     (5)  Promote conferences, symposia, seminars, and institutes in research, science, and technology.
     (c)  The board and the Hawaiian homes commission shall select and designate qualified personnel to administer and effectuate the objectives of the research, science, and technology park."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§10-    Native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park.  (a)  The board and the Hawaiian homes commission shall jointly establish, with the assistance of native Hawaiian business organizations, a native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park that shall serve as an incubator and resource center for native Hawaiian entrepreneurs.
     (b)  The board of trustees and the Hawaiian homes commission, as applicable, are authorized in accordance with law to:
     (1)  Identify and seek the assistance of native Hawaiian business organizations that have the potential or willingness to participate in the development of a Native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park;
     (2)  Establish a loan program for native Hawaiian entrepreneurs to locate and conduct operations in Hawaii;
     (3)  Issue revenue bonds to assist in the financing of the costs of projects developed by native Hawaiian entrepreneurs and related to research, science, and technology;
     (4)  Enter into long-term leases with native Hawaiian entrepreneurs for the siting and development of research, science, and technology projects; and
     (5)  Promote conferences, symposia, seminars, and institutes in research, science, and technology.
     (c)  The board and the Hawaiian homes commission shall select and designate qualified personnel to administer and effectuate the objectives of the research, science, and technology park."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012, and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, for the purpose of establishing a native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the office of Hawaiian affairs for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $          or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012, and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013, for the purpose of establishing a native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of Hawaiian home lands for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  The provisions of the amendments made by this Act to the Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause, or phrase, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held ineffective because there is a requirement of having the consent of the United States to take effect, then that portion only shall take effect upon the granting of consent by the United States and effectiveness of the remainder of these amendments or the application thereof shall not be affected.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Native Hawaiians; Research, Science, and Technology
 
Description:
Requires the Office of Hawaiian Affairs and the Department of Hawaiian Homelands to establish a native Hawaiian research, science, and technology park to serve as an incubator for native Hawaiian entrepreneurs.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
