HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
709
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAIIAN LANGUAGE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaiian is recognized as one of the two official languages of the State.  The Hawaiian language consists of thirteen letters including the ‘okina, or glottal stop, which is a consonant.  While the ‘okina is a letter, it is often omitted from Hawaiian words and names, including the name of the State.
     The legislature finds that Hawaiian words and names should be spelled accurately, especially in Hawai‘i.  The legislature further finds that it would be costly and cumbersome to require that the ‘okina be added to all Hawaiian words and names in all state and local government documents and signs.  Ultimately, however, the legislature finds that if nothing else, the law of this State should require that this State's own name be spelled correctly.
     The purpose of this Act is to provide for the correct spelling of the name "Hawai‘i" in documents and signs prepared by or for state or county agencies or officials.  It is not the intent of the legislature to require the use of glottal stops and macrons for all Hawaiian words, or to require documents and signs published before the effective date of this Act to be amended to comply with this Act.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 1, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§1- _  Spelling of the name of the State.  When spelling the name of the State "Hawai‘i" in documents and signs prepared by or for state or county agencies or officials after the effective date of this section, the glottal stop shall be included.  The requirements of this section shall not apply to any document or sign prepared before the effective date of this section, but shall apply to any replacement document or sign prepared by or for state or county agencies or officials after its effective date."
     SECTION 3.  Section 1-13.5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§1-13.5[]]  Hawaiian language; spelling.  [Macrons]  Except as provided by section 1-   , macrons and glottal stops may be used in the spelling of words or terms in the Hawaiian language in documents prepared by or for state or county agencies or officials.  Any rule, order, policy, or other act, official or otherwise, that prohibits or discourages the use of these symbols shall be void."
     SECTION 4.  Section 23G-15, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§23G-15  Supplements and replacement volumes; extent of revision; prima facie the law.  In preparing the supplements and replacement volumes, the revisor of statutes may:
     (1)  Number and renumber chapters, sections, and parts of sections;
     (2)  Rearrange sections;
     (3)  Change reference numbers to agree with renumbered chapters, parts, or sections;
     (4)  Substitute the proper section or chapter numbers for the terms "the preceding section", "this act", and like terms;
     (5)  Strike out figures where they are merely a repetition of written words;
     (6)  Change capitalization for the purpose of uniformity;
     (7)  Correct manifest clerical or typographical errors;
     (8)  Change any male or female gender term to a term which is neutral in gender when it is clear that the statute is not applicable only to members of one sex and without altering the sense, meaning, or effect of any act; [and]
     (9)  Change the spelling of the name of the State "Hawai‘i" to include the glottal stop; and
    [(9)] (10) Make such other changes in any act incorporated in the supplements and replacement volumes as shall be necessary to conform the style thereof as near as may be with that of the last revision of the laws of Hawaii; provided that in making the revision, the revisor shall not alter the sense, meaning, or effect of any act.
     The matter set forth in the supplements and replacement volumes shall be prima facie evidence of the law."
     SECTION 5.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________


 
Report Title:
Hawaiian Language; Spelling; Name of State
 
Description:
Requires after 7/1/11, the use of a glottal stop in the spelling of "Hawai‘i" in all documents and signs prepared by or for state or county agencies or officials.  Authorizes the revisor of statutes to change the spelling of the name of the State to include the glottal stop when preparing supplements and replacement volumes of the Hawaii Revised Statutes.  Effective 7/1/11.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
