HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
705
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HAWAIIAN HOME LANDS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 204, Hawaiian Homes Commission Act, 1920, as amended, is amended by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
     "(a)  Upon the passage of this Act, all available lands shall immediately assume the status of Hawaiian home lands and be under the control of the department to be used and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act, except that:
     (1)  In case any available land is under lease by the Territory of Hawaii, by virtue of section 73 of the Hawaiian Organic Act, at the time of the passage of this Act, such land shall not assume the status of Hawaiian home lands until the lease expires or the board of land and natural resources withdraws the lands from the operation of the lease.  If the land is covered by a lease containing a withdrawal clause, as provided in section 73(d) of the Hawaiian Organic Act, the board of land and natural resources shall withdraw such lands from the operation of the lease whenever the department gives notice to the board that the department is of the opinion that the lands are required by it for the purposes of this Act; and such withdrawal shall be held to be for a public purpose within the meaning of that term as used in section 73(d) of the Hawaiian Organic Act.
     (2)  Any available land, including lands selected by the department out of a larger area, as provided by this Act, not leased as authorized by section 207(a) of this Act, may be returned to the board of land and natural resources as provided under section 212 of this Act, or may be retained for management by the department.  Any Hawaiian home lands general lease issued by the department after June 30, 1985, shall contain a withdrawal clause allowing the department to withdraw the land leased at any time during the term of the lease for the purposes of this Act.
              In the management of any retained available lands not required for leasing under section 207(a), the department may dispose of those lands or any improvements thereon to the public, including native Hawaiians, on the same terms, conditions, restrictions, and uses applicable to the disposition of public lands in chapter 171, Hawaii Revised Statutes; provided that the department may not sell or dispose of such lands in fee simple except as authorized under section 205 of this Act; provided further that the department is expressly authorized to negotiate, prior to negotiations with the general public, the disposition of Hawaiian home lands or any improvements thereon to a native Hawaiian, or organization or association owned or controlled by native Hawaiians, for commercial, industrial, or other business purposes, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 171, Hawaii Revised Statutes[.]; provided further that for lands that have been leased under agriculture and pasture leases, the department shall negotiate the disposition of Hawaiian home lands or any improvements thereon solely to native Hawaiians, or organizations or associations owned or controlled by native Hawaiians, for agriculture and pasture purposes, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 171, Hawaii Revised Statutes, so far as applicable and not inconsistent with this Act.
     (3)  The department, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, [in order] to consolidate its holdings or to better effectuate the purposes of this Act, may exchange the title to available lands for land, privately or publicly owned, of an equal value.  All lands so acquired by the department shall assume the status of available lands as though the land were originally designated as available lands under section 203 of this Act, and all lands so conveyed by the department shall assume the status of the land for which it was exchanged.  The limitations imposed by section 73(l) of the Hawaiian Organic Act and the land laws of Hawaii as to the area and value of land that may be conveyed by way of exchange shall not apply to exchanges made pursuant hereto.  No such exchange of land publicly owned by the State shall be made without the approval of two-thirds of the members of the board of land and natural resources.  For the purposes of this paragraph, lands "publicly owned" means land owned by a county or the State or the United States."
     SECTION 2.  This Act does not affect rights and duties that matured, penalties that were incurred, and proceedings that were begun before its effective date.
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

Report Title:
Hawaiian Homes Commission Act; General Leases
 
Description:
Restricts the general lease of Hawaiian Home Lands that have traditionally been leased under agriculture and pasture leases to native Hawaiians and organizations and associations owned or controlled by native Hawaiians.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
