HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
70
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HOMELESS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that many homeless persons are known to thrive better when they have ready access to familiar support groups or family members.  The intent of the return-to-home program is to ensure that those individuals who find themselves homeless in the islands are able to reconnect with support networks ready and able to receive them.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a return-to-home program for qualified homeless individual.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part XVII  to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346-    Return-to-home program.  (a)  There is established within the department a voluntary homeless assistance program to be known as the return-to-home program, to provide eligible homeless individuals with assistance in being reunited with family and relatives in the individual's home state.  The department shall administer the program.
     (b)  No individual who is homeless shall be eligible to participate in the program unless:
     (1)  The individual's participation is completely voluntary;
     (2)  The individual has a support system in place in the individual's home state that is willing to receive and accommodate the individual;
     (3)  The individual, if on parole, probation, or awaiting a court hearing or sentencing, has proper clearance from the court to participate in the program;
     (4)  The individual is indigent and lacks the financial resources necessary to secure transportation to return to the individual's home state; and
     (5)  The individual has been receiving social services for a period of no less than one year and the receipt of such social services has been documented.
     (c)  The department shall actively seek the participation of local airlines, cruise lines, charter companies, homeless programs, travel agencies, and the visitor industry to coordinate and implement the program.
     (d)  The department shall also assist program participants with necessary and proper preparations for the return trip, including proper identification, orientation relating to airport security, and the basics of personal care, and shall follow up with each individual within one month of the individual's return to their home state to assess efforts at successful reunification with any family or support system.
     (e)  The department shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 to develop the return-to-home program and adopt standards for its implementation."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $        or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 to implement the return-to-home program, including all program costs and the hiring of necessary staff.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Homeless; Return-to-home Program
 
Description:
Establishes a Return-to-home Program to assist eligible homeless individuals to return to their home state if there is a support network available and able to receive them.  Effective July 1, 2011.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
