HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
703
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SCHOOL REGISTRATION FEES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 302A, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302A-A  Public school registration fees.  (a) The board shall assess an annual registration fee of $25 for each student attending a public school, to be paid upon registration at the beginning of the school year.  The registration fees shall be deposited into the public school registration fee special fund, established under section 302A-B; provided that any student who has paid the annual registration fee that school year shall not be subject to payment of another registration fee if the student transfers to another public school or public charter school during the school year.
     (b)  This section shall not apply to:
     (1)  Students who qualify for free school lunches; or
     (2)  Home schooled students, unless the home schooled student participates in any activities with a public school.
     §302A-B  Public school registration fee special fund.  (a)  There is established a public school registration fee special fund within the state treasury, into which shall be deposited all registration fees collected by the department under section 302A-A.
     (b)  Moneys in the public school registration fee special fund shall be appropriated by the legislature to the department, which shall make the funds available to each public school according to enrollment.
     (c)  The teachers of each public school shall decide how to expend the funds to benefit the students."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 302B, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding two new sections to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§302B-A  Public charter school registration fees.  (a)  The charter school review panel shall assess an annual registration fee of $25 for each student attending a public charter school, to be paid upon registration at the beginning of the school year.  The registration fees shall be deposited into the public charter school registration fee special fund, established under section 302B-B; provided that any student who has paid the annual registration fee that school year shall not be subject to payment of another registration fee if the student transfers to another public school or public charter school during the school year.
     (b)  This section shall not apply to:
     (1)  Students who qualify for free school lunches; or
     (2)  Home schooled students, unless the home schooled student participates in any activities with a public charter school.
     §302B-B  Public charter school registration fee special fund.  (a)  There is established a public charter school registration fee special fund within the state treasury, into which shall be deposited all registration fees collected by the office under section 302B-A.
     (b)  Moneys in the public charter school registration fee special fund shall be appropriated by the legislature to the office, which shall make the funds available to each public charter school according to enrollment.
     (c)  The teachers of each public charter school shall decide how to expend the funds to benefit the students."
     SECTION 3.  If any part of this Act is found to be in conflict with federal requirements that are a prescribed condition for the allocation of federal funds to the State, the conflicting part of this Act is inoperative solely to the extent of the conflict and with respect to the agencies directly affected, and this finding does not affect the operation of the remainder of this Act in its application to the agencies concerned.  The rules under this Act shall meet federal requirements that are a necessary condition to the receipt of federal funds by the State.
     SECTION 4.  In codifying the new sections added by sections 1 and 2 of this Act, the revisor of statutes shall substitute appropriate section numbers for the letters used in designating the new sections in this Act.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall apply to public schools and public charter schools beginning in school year 2012-2013.
     SECTION 6.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 7.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Public School and Public Charter School Registration Fees; and Special Fund.
 
Description:
Requires an annual $25 registration fee for each public school or public charter school student.  Establishes registration fee special funds.  Empowers the teachers to decide how to expend registration fee funds to benefit the students.  Applies to school year 2012-2013.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
