HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
700
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SCHOOLS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 302A-404, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§302A-404  School meals[.]; taro farms.  (a)  School meals shall be made available under the school meals program in every school where the students are required to eat meals at school.
     (b)  Each school in a regional administrative district where taro farms are located, shall serve poi or other taro products under the school meals program not less than once each week; provided that to the greatest extent possible, the poi or taro product shall be purchased from a taro farm located within the regional administrative district."
     SECTION 2.  Section 302A-431.7, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b)  The agriculture education program shall be administered by a director who shall:
     (1)  Assist in assessing the agricultural needs of the State and devise methods of meeting those needs with the agriculture education program;
     (2)  Assist school districts in establishing agriculture education programs;
     (3)  Review school district applications for approval of agriculture education programs;
     (4)  Evaluate existing programs and design complementary programs;
     (5)  Plan research and studies for the improvement of curriculum materials for specialty areas of agriculture, including aquaculture and incumbent worker training;
     (6)  Ensure that the standards and criteria developed under this section satisfy the mandates of federally-assisted career and technical education;
     (7)  Develop in-service programs for teachers and administrators of agriculture education programs;
     (8)  Review applications for agriculture teacher certification;
     (9)  Assist in teacher recruitment and placement in agriculture education programs;
    (10)  Serve as a liaison with the Future Farmers of America, representatives of business, industry, appropriate public agencies, and institutions of higher education, including the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation, to facilitate dissemination of information;
    (11)  Promote improvement of agriculture education programs; [and]
    (12)  Assist in the development of adult, continuing education, and college-level education programs in agriculture[.]; and
    (13)  Arrange for interested schools, classes, or students to work, volunteer, or study on a taro farm located within the regional administrative district of the interested school, class, or students.  The arrangement may accommodate, a school or class project, student volunteer opportunities, or provide school credit or fulfill a public service requirement."
     SECTION 3.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Schools; Taro Farms
 
Description:
Requires the department of education to purchase poi or other taro products for schools that have a taro farm within the regional administrative district.  Requires the agriculture education program to arrange for opportunities to work, volunteer, or study on taro farms within a regional administrative district.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
