HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
71
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE ALOHA STADIUM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Aloha stadium, located on one hundred four acres in the Aiea area of Oahu, has a rich and varied history, serving as the venue for numerous sporting, music, and other events, and has played a central role in the lives of many of the State's residents.  However, the legislature further finds that it is an incontrovertible fact that the useful life of Aloha stadium, which first opened on September 12, 1975, is drawing to an end.  In the Aloha stadium planning study final report published on December 22, 2005, the study described various large sections of the stadium as being "constructed with structural steel, in particular, a weathering type of structural steel.  This steel was purported to be resistant to corrosion after an initial, dense, stable rust layer develops on the surface.  This dense, stable layer of rust is often called a 'protective patina' in the technical and marketing literature for this type of steel.  However, it was later learned that weathering steel is sensitive to salt-laden air environments like Hawaii.  In such environments, the protective patina does not stabilize but instead continues to corrode.  A ten-year corrosion abatement program was started in 1985 and completed in 1995, costing $80,000,000.  However, the structural certification performed in 1995 did not examine wind loads on the structure.  Therefore, the structural safety of Aloha stadium under wind loading is unknown.
     The study also reported a plethora of issues that need to be addressed concerning structural safety and general conditions, including:
     (1)  Major maintenance of corrosion protection systems;
     (2)  Excessive deflections of curved pedestrian bridges;
     (3)  Replacement of the entire main roof canopy metal deck;
     (4)  Replacement of waterproofing membrane for the seating bowl and concourses;
     (5)  Replacement of seating needs throughout the entire stadium seating bowl;
     (6)  Replacement of the undersized scoreboard cooling system;
     (7)  Replacement of piping insulation and other water damaged finishes;
     (8)  Rejuvenation of the moveable stand transport system;
     (9)  Additional toilets;
    (10)  Repairs to the severely deteriorated concrete-and-metal deck throughout the stadium;
    (11)  Raising of guardrails in numerous locations for safety;
    (12)  Addition of passenger elevators that presently do not exist and need to be added to comply with current Americans with Disabilities Act provisions;
    (13)  Resurfacing of the asphalt parking lot;
    (14)  Replacement of field lighting and associated transformers and lighting control system that are nearing the end of their useful lives;
    (15)  Upgrading existing fire alarm systems; and
    (16)  Replacement of parking lot lighting transformers.
     The 2005 study also identified a host of capital improvements to Aloha stadium that, if all the identified capital improvements are implemented in the near future and a systematic, cyclic capital improvement program is adhered to throughout its remaining life, would extend the useful life of the stadium by twenty to thirty years.  The anticipated cost for the initial improvements needed is $99,200,000 with an additional $115,400,000 anticipated to be expended for ongoing maintenance over a twenty-year period.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the governor to direct the department of land and natural resources to dispose of the Aloha stadium and arrange for the acquisition of land at an appropriate location on Oahu on which a new stadium may be constructed.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The governor shall direct the department of land and natural resources to:
     (1)  Dispose of the Aloha stadium and the surrounding land upon which the stadium is situated that are a part of the Aloha stadium, by any appropriate method, including sale, lease, or exchange of land;
     (2)  Acquire suitable and adequate lands at an appropriate location on Oahu upon which a new stadium may be constructed, by any appropriate method, including purchase, lease, or exchange of land; and
     (3)  Ensure that the proceeds of the sale, lease, or land exchange of the Aloha stadium and surrounding lands in paragraph (1) are to be applied to the purchase, lease, or land exchange of suitable lands in paragraph (2).
     (b)  The department of land and natural resources shall begin plans to implement the disposition of the Aloha stadium and the identification and acquisition of replacement lands for the construction of a new stadium immediately.  The department shall submit annual written progress reports to the legislature twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session until the Aloha stadium is finally disposed of and new lands are finally acquired.
     (c)  The Aloha stadium authority shall fully cooperate with the department of land and natural resources to carry out the purposes of this Act.  The duties, responsibilities, and functions of the Aloha stadium authority shall not be affected in any way by the implementation of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on January 1, 2012.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

 

 
Report Title:
Aloha Stadium; Disposition; Acquisition of New Land
 
Description:
Requires governor to direct department of land and natural resources to:  dispose of Aloha Stadium; acquire suitable lands at an appropriate location on Oahu upon which to build a new stadium; and ensure that proceeds of the disposition of Aloha stadium and surrounding lands are used to acquire the new lands.





