HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
714
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HEALTH PLANNING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Article IX, section 1 of the Hawaii Constitution states that "The State shall provide for the protection and promotion of the public health."
     Accordingly, the state health planning and development agency was created by Act 159, Session Laws of Hawaii 1975, and codified as chapter 323D, Hawaii Revised Statutes, the purpose of which is to establish a health planning and resources development program to promote accessibility for all the people of the State to quality health care services at reasonable cost.
     The purpose of this Act is to clarify the philosophy behind the formulation of the state health services and facilities plan and require that the adoption or amendment of the plan be subject to the rulemaking requirements of chapter 91, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 2.  Section 323D-15, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§323D-15  State health services and facilities plan.  There shall be a state health services and facilities plan, which shall address the health care needs of the State, including inpatient care, health care facilities, and special needs.  The plan shall not address competition as a means for achieving its purpose, but rather depict the most economical and efficient system of care commensurate with adequate quality of care, and shall include standards for utilization of health care facilities and major medical equipment.  The utilization standards in the plan shall clearly detail the methodology for determining capacity and excess capacity in the State for each category of health care facility and major medical equipment regulated.  The plan shall provide for the reduction or elimination of underutilized, redundant, or inappropriate health care facilities and health care services.  The adoption or amendment of the plan shall be subject to chapter 91."
     SECTION 3.  The state health planning and development agency shall conduct a review of its existing state health services and facilities plan and conduct proceedings in accordance with chapter 91, Hawaii Revised of Statutes, to adopt the plan and any amendments made to the plan.
     The state health planning and development agency shall submit a report to the legislature not later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session that details its actions taken to comply with this section.
     SECTION 4.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval and shall apply retroactively to June 30, 2009.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Health Planning and Development Agency
 
Description:
Requires that the state health services and facilities plan be adopted in accordance with the rulemaking procedures of chapter 91, HRS.  Establishes criteria for the plan.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
