HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
727
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE TO NEEDY FAMILIES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

PART I.
     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii is experiencing difficult economic times.  In February 2008, a respected local economist commented that "[a]ll indications now are for slower growth in Hawaii's near future".  Real impacts were felt soon after this prediction.  On March 31, 2008, after sixty-one years of operation in Hawaii, Aloha Airlines announced the discontinuation of its passenger service; on April 2, 2008, ATA Airlines announced the discontinuation of all operations after twenty-five years of operation; and on April 5, 2008, Molokai Properties Limited (commonly known as Molokai Ranch), with a history spanning one hundred forty-five years, announced its closure.
     On March 30, 2008, one of Hawaii's daily newspapers noted, "Hawaii mortgage delinquencies ratcheted up last year and show no indication of slowing this year as economic growth weakens, inflation remains strong and home values flatten".  In 2009, visitor arrivals dropped 4.5 per cent from 2008, and visitor spending fell 11.7 per cent from 2008.
     Hawaii's economy has slowed substantially, and the State's expenditure of temporary assistance for needy family funds must account for this economic slowdown.  The legislature finds that the best approach is to continue supplying essential health, education, employment, and economic assistance while also preserving an adequate reserve of funds.  While maintaining cash reserves for future expenditures is imperative, so too is the continued provision of necessary support programs.  These programs will yield healthier families, more productive employees, and, eventually, a stronger economy.
     SECTION 2.  The legislature finds that it is imperative to continue providing monthly cash benefits to families for food, clothing, shelter, and other essential items.  Monthly cash benefits are necessary to a family's survival, and these funds also act as a stimulus to the local economy when spent by recipients at local businesses.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the federal temporary assistance for needy families program funds the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the provision of monthly cash benefits to eligible families.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this part.
PART II.
     SECTION 4.  The legislature finds that the State's economy depends upon its human capital.  Having a self-sufficient, dependable, and strong workforce is imperative to a robust economy.   Programs that train individuals for jobs, help with job-search activities, and encourage financial self-sufficiency result in a better-developed workforce and less strain on support services and benefit programs. 
     SECTION 5.  There is appropriated out of the federal temporary assistance for needy families program funds the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for employment training programs and other services that enable families receiving benefits to find jobs and become self-sufficient.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this part.
PART III.
     SECTION 6.  The legislature finds that Hawaii has the twelfth highest teenage pregnancy rate in the nation.  Young women who become pregnant before the age of eighteen have a higher risk of poverty, dropping out of high school, and experiencing preterm births.  The department of human services contracted with The Lewin Group to determine the effectiveness of teenage pregnancy education programs provided under temporary assistance to needy families grants.  The report found a positive impact on program participants, and the State's general trend is a decrease in teenage pregnancy rates. 
     The legislature finds that it is necessary for the well-being of Hawaii's youth to provide education about the effects of teenage pregnancy and the importance of informed decision-making through programs funded by temporary assistance for needy families.
     SECTION 7.  There is appropriated out of the federal temporary assistance for needy families program funds the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for teenage pregnancy education programs.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this part.
PART IV.
     SECTION 8.  The legislature finds that it is important for a family's emotional and economic stability to maintain the family unit.  This can be achieved when families are self-sufficient, stable, and educated. 
     SECTION 9.  There is appropriated out of the federal temporary assistance for needy families program funds the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for employment training programs other services that enable families receiving benefits to remain intact.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this part.
PART V.
     SECTION 10.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
TANF Funds; Allocation of Expenditures
 
Description:
Appropriates TANF funds, emphasizing direct payments to families, employment training, teenage pregnancy prevention, and keeping families intact.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
