HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
722
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CADMIUM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that cadmium is an extremely toxic metal that increasingly has been detected in high levels in children's products, most notably, products manufactured in China and imported for sale in the United States.  Cadmium is frequently found in children's products made of metal, such as jewelry and clothing accessories, but it has also been found in pigments and paints that are used in children's toys and products other than jewelry and clothing.  Children are at particular risk because of their propensity to bite, chew, or suck on their toys, jewelry, and other articles.  The legislature further finds that cadmium, even if ingested in small amounts, can cause kidney failure and bone damage, while repeated exposure to cadmium can cause cancer.  Small children exposed to cadmium can experience delayed brain development.  
     The legislature finds that it is in the best interest of Hawaii's children to significantly reduce their exposure to cadmium as early as possible and, ultimately, eliminate exposure altogether.
     The purpose of this Act is to ensure the health and safety of children in the State by prohibiting the manufacture, sale, and distribution of children's products that contain cadmium.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 321, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§321-     Cadmium in children's products; prohibition.   (a)  After June 30, 2013, no person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale, or otherwise distribute in the State any children's product that contains cadmium in an amount more than .004 per cent by weight.
     (b)  As used in this section:
     "Cadmium" means elemental cadmium and any compounds or alloys that contain cadmium.
     "Children's product" means any consumer product or component thereof that is designed and intended primarily for use by children under twelve years of age, including but not limited to jewelry, clothing and accessories, decorative objects, backpacks, candy, food, dietary supplements and other edible or chewable items, toys, furniture, or other articles used by or intended to be used by children.
     (c)  The director shall adopt rules pursuant to chapter 91 for the purpose of this section, including rules that provide for product testing and enforcement of this section."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Cadmium; Children's Products
 
Description:
Prohibits the sale, manufacture, and distribution in the State of children's products that contain cadmium.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
