HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
728
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ASSET BUILDING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that according to the National Council on Disabilities, forty-four per cent of temporary assistance for needy families recipients are individuals with disabilities.  Further, almost twenty per cent of these recipients are the parents of a child with a disability.  The legislature further finds that there is a critical need to coordinate services for recipients to meet the needs of individuals with disabilities along with the needs of those for whom learning continues to be a lifelong struggle.
     The legislature also finds that there is a need in Hawaii to work toward establishing linkages and strengthening existing ties between different services for teenagers with disabilities.  This should include services that teenage parents can use to facilitate their transition to adulthood, such as vocational rehabilitation services.  There is a need to use temporary assistance for needy families funds to create interagency linkages that are designed to help teenagers meet the temporary assistance for needy families rules, such as disability coordination services between school systems and agencies.  Temporary assistance for needy families funds can also help to provide support services, including assistance for a teenage parent who receives supplemental security income with child care or transportation services.
     Temporary assistance for needy families funds can also assist individuals with disabilities that require program modifications and support services to participate in, and benefit from, education and training programs.  The State must assist these individuals so that they can fulfill temporary assistance for needy families work requirements.  The need for adequate screening and assessment is particularly acute for these applicants and recipients with disabilities, because it is unlikely that their disabilities will be identified.
     Access to the proper expertise and resources should be provided to assist individuals with disabilities who are unable to navigate the existing benefits-application processes and to ensure that the skills and experience to further assist those who are unable to meet specified work requirements are available.
     The purpose of this Act is to enhance asset building for individuals with disabilities and the parents of children with disabilities by:
     (1)  Requiring the department of human services to establish a pilot project to expand asset building classes; and
     (2)  Appropriating funds for the pilot project.
     SECTION 2.  The department of human services shall establish a three-year pilot project, beginning with fiscal year 2011-2012, to conduct and expand asset building classes statewide to serve individuals with disabilities and the parents of children with disabilities by helping them develop skills in:
     (1)  Accessing existing community resources;
     (2)  Assessment and training on assistive technology;
     (3)  Career exploration; and
     (4)  Basic computer literacy.
     The department of human services may enter into contracts pursuant to chapter 103F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to carry out the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of temporary assistance for needy families funds the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary is appropriated for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the department of human services to establish a three-year pilot project, beginning with fiscal year 2011-2012, to conduct and expand asset building classes statewide to serve individuals with disabilities and the parents of children with disabilities by helping them develop skills.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of human services for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Asset Building; Disabled Persons; TANF Funds; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a three-year pilot project within the Department of Human Services to conduct and expand asset building classes statewide to serve individuals with disabilities and the parents of children with a disability.  Appropriates funds.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
