HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
731
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR THE WOMEN AND INFANT CHILDREN FARMERS' MARKET NUTRITION PROGRAM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  A wealth of research has been conducted establishing a link between poverty, obesity, and poor nutrition.  Hawaii's low-income population must often choose between paying for necessary expenses and developing a healthy diet.  This issue becomes especially salient when it comes to the specific nutritional needs of low-income pregnant women and young children who depend upon the social safety net provided by the State.
     Intimately connected to this social safety net is the state of the local economy.  The legislature finds that diversification is key to building a stable economic base.  By diversifying, Hawaii can utilize its occupational talent pool, create career paths and products that capitalize on Hawaii's unique location and needs to shape a profile that is able to withstand economic fluctuation in both national and international economies.  Given the State's location and heritage, nowhere is economic diversification more applicable than in the State's agricultural sector.
     The legislature also finds that the United States Department of Agriculture's Women and Infant Children Farmers' Market Nutrition Program awarded $19,300,000 nationwide in 2009, to provide recipients of the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children the opportunity to purchase fresh fruits and vegetables at local registered farmer's markets.  The current structure of this grant program requires the State to match the federal administrative funds allocated to them by contributing at least thirty per cent of the administrative cost of the program, which typically amounts to between six and ten per cent of the total award.
     The economic effect of implementing this federal partnership program would be two-fold.  First, it would supplement the State's social safety net by drawing down federal funds to assure low-income pregnant women and children greater variety and nutritive value in their food, and second, it would support the agricultural sector of Hawaii's economy, since all funds awarded through the Program go directly to local farmers.
     The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds for the State's matching share for the establishment and administration of the Women and Infant Children Farmers' Market Nutrition Program and to support diversified agriculture in the State.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $10,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 for the department of health to develop and administer the Women and Infant Children Farmers' Market Nutrition Program; provided that the department of health shall develop and submit to the Food and Nutrition Service of the United States Department of Agriculture a state plan describing the manner in which it intends to implement, operate, and administer all aspects of the Women and Infant Children Farmers' Market Nutrition Program.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
WIC Farmers' Market Nutrition Program; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates funds for the State's matching share for the establishment and administration of the Women and Infant Children Farmers' Market Nutrition Program and to support diversified agriculture in the State.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
