HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
732
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE FOR NEEDY FAMILIES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that existing federal law provides for allocation of federal funds through the federal temporary assistance for needy families block grant program to eligible states in the form of cash assistance and other benefits to qualified low-income families.  The legislature further finds that homelessness can occur in a variety of circumstances, including the direct result of being the victim of domestic violence.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of human services to provide families with homeless assistance payments when homelessness is a direct result of a verified incident of domestic violence by a spouse, partner, or roommate.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 346, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§346‑    Temporary assistance for needy families; homeless assistance; verification; notification; not income; rules.  (a)  A family shall be eligible for temporary and permanent homeless assistance when homelessness is a direct result of domestic violence by a spouse, partner, or roommate.  These circumstances shall be verified by a third-party governmental or private health or human services agency, except that domestic violence may also be verified by a sworn statement by the victim.  Homeless assistance payments pursuant to this section shall not be issued more than once in any twelve‑month period.  In addition, if the domestic violence is verified by a sworn statement by the victim, the homeless assistance payments shall be limited to two periods of not more than sixteen consecutive calendar days of temporary assistance and two payments of permanent assistance.  A former recipient of homeless assistance benefits who qualifies under this subsection for a second time in a twenty-four‑month period shall be required to participate in a homelessness avoidance case plan as a condition of eligibility for homeless assistance benefits.  The case plan shall review what services were offered to the recipient and consider what additional services would assist the recipient avoiding future domestic violence.
     (b)  A family is considered homeless, for the purpose of this section, when the family:
     (1)  Lacks a fixed and regular nighttime residence;
     (2)  Has a primary nighttime residence that is a supervised publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living accommodations; or
     (3)  Is residing in a public or private place not designed for, or ordinarily used as, a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
     (c)  Through the department's standardized application form, the department shall notify all applicants and recipients of homeless assistance that other benefits are available and shall provide an opportunity for homeless assistance recipients to apply for other relevant benefits or funds quickly and efficiently.
     (d)  The homeless assistance amounts payable to recipients shall not constitute income to recipients under this section.
     (e)  The department shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to ensure the uniform statewide application of this section."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
TANF; Homeless Assistance for Domestic Violence Victims
 
Description:
Requires department of human services to provide families with homeless assistance when homelessness is a direct result of domestic violence.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
