HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
745
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ENERGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 227D-2, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
     "(b) The governing body of the authority shall consist of a board of directors having [thirteen] eleven voting members.  [Three members] One member from the general public shall be appointed by the governor [for staggered terms] pursuant to section 26-34, [except that one of these members] and shall be a resident of the county of Hawaii.  One member shall be appointed by the president of the senate.  One member shall be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.  These three members shall serve staggered terms of four years each; provided that the first person appointed by the governor shall serve two years, the first person appointed by the president of the senate shall serve three years, and the first person appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives shall serve four years.  Thereafter, subsequent appointees shall each serve a term of four years.  The members shall be selected on the basis of their knowledge, interest, and proven expertise in[, but not limited to, one or more] no less than one of the following fields:  finance, commerce and trade, corporate management, marketing, economics, engineering, energy management, real estate development[, property management,] or management, aquaculture, and ocean science.  [The chairperson and secretary of the research advisory committee shall serve on the board.]  The director of business, economic development, and tourism, the [chairperson of the board of land and natural resources, the president of the University of Hawaii,] chancellor of the University of Hawaii at Hilo, the mayor of the county of Hawaii, an appointed member from the board of the high technology development corporation, [and] an appointed member from the board of the Hawaii strategic development corporation, and a member of the board of the office of Hawaiian affairs, or their designated representatives, shall serve as ex officio, voting members of the board.  The tenants of the authority shall elect two members to the board from among the tenants of the authority[, of which one member shall serve a two-year term, and one member shall serve a four-year term.  In electing the tenant members, each tenant shall be entitled to cast one vote for each member position].  To participate in the election of tenant members or to serve as a tenant representative on the authority, a tenant shall be an owner or active manager of a business with its principal place of business located within Hawaii.  Any tenant who ceases to be a tenant of the authority shall be immediately disqualified from participating in the election of tenant members or from serving as a tenant representative on the authority.   The tenant members shall be recused from voting on setting lease rents, water rates, or utility rates, but may participate in [discussions.  The director of business, economic development, and tourism shall serve as the chairperson until such time as a chairperson is elected by the board from the membership.] decision-making on other items.  The board shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, secretary, and other officers as it deems necessary."
     SECTION 2.  Section 227D-4, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§227D-4[]]  Research advisory committee.  The authority shall appoint a research advisory committee for the purpose of obtaining expert and specialized counsel and advice on matters relating to scientific research [and may include as members of the committee officers and employees of any government department or agency or members of the scientific community; provided that at least two members of the board shall be appointed to the committee.] projects proposed to be located at the authority's ocean science and technology park; provided that four members shall be appointed from the board of directors of the authority and shall include the board members representing the University of Hawaii at Hilo, high technology development corporation, and Hawaii strategic development corporation.  Three other members shall be selected by the committee and shall reside in the county of Hawaii.  Members of the advisory committee shall elect the chairperson and secretary of the committee[, who shall serve as members of the board].  The authority may assign its own staff to aid and assist the committee and may reimburse any member of the committee for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the member's work for the authority."
     SECTION 3.  Upon the effective date of this Act and notwithstanding section 26-34(a), Hawaii Revised Statutes, and any other law to the contrary, the terms of all the members of the natural energy laboratory of Hawaii Authority's board of directors shall expire; provided that the ex officio board members, with the exception of the president of the University of Hawaii and the chairperson of land and natural resources, and the tenant board members may continue to serve in a holdover capacity pursuant to section 26-34(b), Hawaii Revised Statutes, until such time as the board member's successor is nominated and appointed, or elected as the case may be.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii Authority; Board Appointments and Terms
 
Description:
Changes the representation qualifications for the natural energy laboratory of Hawaii authority board of directors.  Clarifies the role of the research advisory committee and who may serve on the committee.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
