HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
753
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HOMELESS PROGRAMS.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that homelessness continues to be one of the State's most significant and challenging social problems.  The number of homeless persons in the State, estimated to be approximately six thousand on any given day, is indicative of the limited shelter space available.
     The legislature further finds that new and innovative solutions are needed to address the homelessness crisis.  Oregon, for example, has adopted laws that authorize political subdivisions to allow religious institutions to offer overnight camping space for homeless persons living in vehicles.  Similarly, Santa Barbara, California, has instituted a program that allows private organizations to use county-owned parking lots to provide overnight sleeping space for homeless persons with vehicles.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the department of human services, in consultation with the counties and private homeless assistance programs, to develop temporary nighttime parking lots to provide safe overnight locations for homeless persons who would otherwise sleep in their vehicles on private or public property.  It is the legislature's intent that this program supplement existing policies and initiatives regarding the State's homeless population.
     SECTION 2.  Section 346-375, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "[[]§346-375[]]  Temporary emergency shelter[.]; temporary nighttime parking lots.  (a)  In addition to any other duties prescribed by law, the department shall develop, in consultation with the four counties, a procedure for identifying locations that shall be used for temporary emergency shelters for homeless individuals and families.  The department shall actively partner with and monitor the efforts of the counties.
     (b)  Each county shall be responsible for partnering with nonprofit organizations to locate, designate, and maintain the areas that shall be used for temporary emergency shelters.  The designated locations may include private, county, state, and federal lands.
     (c)  The department, in consultation with the mayor of each of the four counties and any interested public or private homeless assistance programs, shall develop temporary nighttime parking lots in each county to provide safe overnight locations for homeless individuals who would otherwise sleep during the night in their motor vehicles parked on public or private roads or property.  Any designated temporary nighttime parking lot under this subsection shall admit homeless individuals and their motor vehicles beginning at 7:00 p.m. each day and shall require all homeless individuals and their motor vehicles to exit the parking lot at 6:00 a.m. the following morning to accommodate regular public parking.  The department shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to implement this subsection, including, with regard to the use of these temporary nighttime parking lots:
     (1)  Procedures to screen potential homeless individuals;
     (2)  Prohibition of alcohol or drug use; and
     (3)  Outreach, job counseling, and health care services to homeless individuals."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Homeless; Temporary Nighttime Shelter Parking Lots
 
Description:
Requires department of human services, in consultation with the counties and any interested private homeless assistance programs, to develop temporary nighttime parking lots to provide safe overnight locations for homeless individuals who would otherwise sleep in their motor vehicles on public or private roads or property.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
