HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
785
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CONSERVATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to:
     (1)  Require the revenues of the land conservation fund from the conveyance tax to be temporarily expended for invasive species control and mitigation, reforestation, and sediment run-off mitigation; and
     (2)  Appropriate the revenues for those public purposes.
     The legislature intends this Act to create job opportunities by appropriating funds for those public purposes.  The legislature believes that employing persons will generate more economic activity within the State than acquiring land from entities or persons of presumably higher incomes.
     This Act takes effect on July 1, 2011, and shall be repealed on June 30, 2013.
     SECTION 2.  Section 173A-5, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (h) to read as follows:
     "(h)  [The] Revenues in the fund from other than the conveyance tax shall be used for:
     (1)  The acquisition of interests or rights in land having value as a resource to the State, whether in fee title or through the establishment of permanent conservation easements under chapter 198 or agricultural easements;
     (2)  The payment of any debt service on state financial instruments relating to the acquisition of interests or rights in land having value as a resource to the State;
     (3)  Annual administration costs for the fund, not to exceed five per cent of annual fund revenues of the previous year; and
     (4)  Costs related to the operation, maintenance, and management of lands acquired by way of this fund that are necessary to protect, maintain, or restore resources at risk on these lands, or that provide for greater public access and enjoyment of these lands; provided that the costs related to the operation, maintenance, and management of lands acquired by way of this fund do not exceed five per cent of annual fund revenues of the previous year[;
     (5)  Invasive].
     Revenues in the fund from the conveyance tax shall be used for invasive species control and mitigation [by the invasive species council under chapter 194; and
     (6)  Reforestation], reforestation, and sediment run-off mitigation.  To the extent possible, the revenues shall be expended for salary and fringe benefit costs of employees hired by the department of land and natural resources, invasive species council, or a contractor for such purposes."
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the land conservation fund the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for invasive species control and mitigation, reforestation, and sediment run-off mitigation.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of land and natural resources for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011, and shall be repealed on June 30, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Land Conservation Fund; Purposes of Expenditures
 
Description:
Requires the revenues of the land conservation fund from the conveyance tax to be temporarily expended for invasive species control and mitigation, reforestation, and sediment run-off control.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
