HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
7
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 

RELATING TO ELECTRIC WHEELING.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii relies on imported oil to meet over ninety per cent of the State's energy needs, leaving the State vulnerable to supply interruptions and oil price volatility.  Bold action is needed to develop a progressive energy strategy for Hawaii that integrates Hawaii's indigenous energy resources into electricity production to promote economic stability, enhance energy security, and demonstrate environmental stewardship.
     The purpose of this Act is to require the public utilities commission to establish a wheeling tariff to enable suppliers of electricity to use the transmission and distribution facilities of an electric utility to distribute power to the suppliers' end-use customers.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 269, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§269-     Wheeling tariff.  (a)  No later than January 1, 2012, the public utilities commission shall establish a wheeling tariff to enable the wheeling of electricity generated by nonutility electric energy producers over an electric utility's distribution and transmission facilities to the nonutility electric energy producers' end-use customers; provided that the commission shall establish requirements in conjunction with the tariff to ensure, among other things:
     (1)  Nondiscriminatory access by nonutility electric energy producers to the electric utility's distribution and transmission facilities;
     (2)  The financial responsibility of nonutility electric energy producers;
     (3)  The ability and willingness of a nonutility electric energy producer to supply power in accordance with statutes, rules, contracts, agreements, and arrangements; and
     (4)  Fair dealing between electric utilities and all other electric energy producers.
     (b)  For purposes of this section, "wheeling" means the act of transporting electric power using distribution and transmission facilities owned or operated by an electric utility.
     (c)  Wheeling tariffs paid to an electric utility by a nonutility electric energy producer shall be used solely by the electric utility to offset the actual cost of electricity transmission and distribution.
     (d)  The commission shall establish rules, pursuant to chapter 91, to implement this section."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Public Utilities Commission; Wheeling Tariff
 
Description:
Requires the public utilities commission to establish a wheeling tariff to enable nonutility electric energy producers to use the transmission and distribution facilities of an electric utility to distribute power to the producers' end-use customers.
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
