HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
825
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The purpose of this Act is to create an advisory board of Hawaii residents to periodically confer with out-of-state holders of controlling or major interests in companies incorporated within the State.
     SECTION 2.  Section 26-18, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended to read as follows:
     "§26-18  Department of business, economic development, and tourism.  (a)  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall be headed by a single executive to be known as the director of business, economic development, and tourism.
     The department shall undertake statewide business and economic development activities, undertake energy development and management, provide economic research and analysis, plan for the use of Hawaii's ocean resources, and encourage the development and promotion of industry and international commerce through programs established by law.
     (b)  The following are placed in the department of business, economic development, and tourism for administrative purposes as defined by section 26-35:  Aloha Tower development corporation, Hawaii community development authority, Hawaii housing finance and development corporation, high technology development corporation, land use commission, natural energy laboratory of Hawaii authority, and any other boards and commissions as shall be provided by law.
     There shall also be placed under the department a business outreach board, comprised of fourteen members as follows:
     (1)  Ten members shall be appointed by the governor without necessity of confirmation by the senate.  The ten members shall be residents of the State.  Of the ten members, five shall be representative of business, and three shall be representative of organized private sector labor, and two shall be representatives of organized public sector labor.  The members may be removed at any time by the governor; and
     (2)  Two members shall be members of the senate appointed by the president of the senate and two members shall be members of the house of representatives appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.  These members shall serve at the pleasure of the senate president or house speaker, as applicable.   
     The board shall have the duty of periodically conferring with out-of-state holders of controlling or major interests in companies incorporated within the State on problems and concerns regarding doing business in the State.
     (c)  The department of business, economic development, and tourism shall be empowered to establish, modify, or abolish statistical boundaries for cities, towns, or villages in the State and shall publish, as expeditiously as possible, an up-to-date list of cities, towns, and villages after changes to statistical boundaries have been made."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Business Outreach Board; Creation
 
Description:
Creates a business outreach board under the department of business, economic development, and tourism to periodically confer with out-of-state holders or controlling or major interests in companies incorporated within the State on problems and concerns regarding doing business in the State.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
