HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
832
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO CONSUMER PROTECTION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 269, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§269-     Credit for service interruptions.  (a)  In the event that a subscriber's service provided by any utility subject to this chapter is interrupted, other than by the negligence or willful act of the subscriber, and remains out of order for more than four hours, the utility shall make an appropriate adjustment to the subscriber's account or issue a refund as necessary to account for the service interruption.
     (b)  In the event that the subscriber's service is interrupted by a natural or other disaster beyond the control of the utility, adjustments or refunds shall be made to the subscribers if service is not restored within seventy-two hours.
     (c)  The amount of an adjustment or refund shall be determined on the basis of the known period of interruption, beginning from the time that the service interruption is reported to the utility.  An adjustment or refund to a subscriber shall be the pro rata part of the month's charge for the service for the period of hours that service was interrupted.  A refund may be accomplished by a credit on a subsequent bill for the service provided."
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 440G, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§440G-     Credit for service interruptions.  (a)  In the event that a subscriber's cable service provided by a cable operator subject to this chapter is interrupted, other than by the negligence or willful act of the subscriber, and remains out of order for more than four hours, the cable operator shall make an appropriate adjustment to the subscriber's account or issue a refund as necessary to account for the service interruption.
     (b)  In the event that the subscriber's cable service is interrupted by a natural or other disaster beyond the control of the cable operator, adjustments or refunds shall be made to the subscriber if cable service is not restored within seventy-two hours.
     (c)  The amount of an adjustment or refund shall be determined on the basis of the known period of interruption, beginning from the time that the cable service interruption is reported to the cable operator.  An adjustment or refund to a subscriber shall be the pro rata part of the month's charge for the cable service for the period of hours that service was interrupted.  A refund may be accomplished by a credit on a subsequent bill for the cable service provided."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Cable Television and Public Utilities; Service Interruptions; Refund
 
Description:
Requires cable television operators and public utilities to issue refunds to subscribers in the event of service interruptions.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
