HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
849
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO EDUCATION.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the weighted student formula was established in 2004 to allocate funds to schools based on a formula that provides a basic per capita allocation for every student and additional funds based on various student characteristics, one of which is geographic isolation.  The legislature's intent in enacting the weighted student formula is to ensure that funding goes to schools with the greatest need based on various student characteristics and that the funding is used at the discretion of the individual schools.  However, because the weighted student formula allocates resources in the form of funding rather than positions, geographically remote schools and small schools lost several well-qualified teachers and thousands of dollars in funding, resulting in the loss of many courses necessary for graduation.
     The legislature also finds that online learning provides an opportunity to address the shortcomings of the weighted student formula and alleviate the loss of funding for well-qualified teachers and lack of available courses in geographically remote schools and small schools.  The online learning task force, established by the legislature by Act 275, Session Laws of Hawaii 2007, reported that online learning has the potential to provide choices for students and educators in "remote areas with no teacher or highly qualified teacher available."  The task force found that in 2007, school infrastructure plans were adequate with over 54,000 networked computers in over 15,000 classrooms.  The task force created the Hawaii virtual learning network to expand and systematize online courses to offer Hawaii students a wide array of online courses.  In addition, in 2010, the federal government announced a two-year $47,000,000 project to improve educational opportunities and beef up distance learning capabilities, which will include the installation of fiber-optic cable to sites on Molokai and Lanai.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a pilot project on the island of Lanai to expand the Hawaii virtual learning network and e-school to offer online courses and provide students access to requisite courses for graduation that are currently unavailable under the weighted student formula.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  The department of education shall establish a pilot project for Lanai high and elementary school to expand the Hawaii virtual learning network e-school program.  The objective of the pilot project shall be to provide high school students on the island of Lanai access to the selection of basic elective courses required for graduation.
     (b)  Under the pilot project established pursuant to subsection (a), the department of education shall:
     (1)  Provide training and mentoring for teachers to become online instructors;
     (2)  Develop supporting infrastructure and resources for students to allow them to benefit from online courses and activities;
     (3)  Provide online tutoring and mentoring programs for students through partnerships that include the University of Hawaii;
     (4)  Work with the University of Hawaii to optimize the utilization of the distance learning capabilities being funded by the federal government; and
     (5)  Evaluate and determine the appropriate funding mechanism for online learning programs for geographically remote schools, whether through the weighted student formula, categorical allocation, or other funding mechanisms.
SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 to expand the Hawaii virtual learning network and e-school to provide online courses that are currently unavailable.
The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  The department of education shall submit a progress report to the legislature on the status of the implementation of the pilot project no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012, and a final report no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2013.
SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Education; Virtual Learning Pilot Program; Lanai; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a pilot project that expands the e-school program offered by the Hawaii virtual learning network and the DOE to Lanai high and elementary school.  Appropriates funds.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
