HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
869
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRICULTURE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Chapter 141, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§141‑    State matching funds program; county expenditures to support agriculture; special fund.  (a)  The department of agriculture shall establish a program to provide state matching funds to counties that expend county funds for positions or other expenses incurred to support agriculture in their respective counties.  The department shall establish appropriate procedures, standards, and criteria for:
     (1)  Determining county expenditures that qualify for state matching funds and the ratio of state matching funds provided for each dollar expended by the counties;
     (2)  Determining, if requests for state matching funds exceed the funding available, the most appropriate way to distribute available funds to the counties; and
     (3)  Determining the process by which counties submit requests for state matching funds and establishing deadlines or timelines, if any, and other similar details of the program.
     (b)  There is established within the state treasury the state matching funds for county agricultural support special fund which shall be administered by the department, and into which shall be deposited legislative appropriations, grants and gifts, all interest earned or accrued on moneys deposited in the fund, and any other moneys made available to the fund.  The state matching funds for county agricultural support special fund shall be used to provide state matching funds under the program specified in subsection (a)."
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to be deposited into the state matching funds for county agricultural support special fund.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the state matching funds for county agricultural support special fund the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the purposes of establishing the state matching funds for county agricultural support program pursuant to this Act.
     SECTION 4.  The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 5.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval; provided that sections 2, 3, and 4 shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
State Matching Funds; Counties; Agriculture; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a program for state matching funds for expenses incurred by the counties in supporting agriculture.  Makes an appropriation to the department of agriculture.
 
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
