HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
868
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Section 141-10, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by amending subsection (c) to read as follows:
     "(c)  Subject to legislative appropriation, moneys in the special fund may be expended for the following purposes:
     (1)  The awarding of grants to farmers for agricultural production or processing activity;
     (2)  The acquisition of real property for agricultural production or processing activity;
     (3)  The improvement of real property, dams, reservoirs, irrigation systems, and transportation networks necessary to promote agricultural production or processing activity[;], including investigative studies to identify and assess necessary improvements to dams, reservoirs, irrigation systems, and transportation networks;
     (4)  The purchase of equipment necessary for agricultural production or processing activity;
     (5)  The conduct of research on and testing of agricultural products and markets;
     (6)  The funding of agricultural inspector positions within the department of agriculture;
     (7)  The promotion and marketing of agricultural products grown or raised in the State; and
     (8)  Any other activity intended to increase agricultural production or processing that may lead to reduced importation of food, fodder, or feed from outside the State."
     SECTION 2.  The director of finance is authorized to issue general obligation bonds in the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary, which shall be deposited into the agricultural development and food security special fund and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary is appropriated for plans, design, engineering, investigative studies, construction, renovation, repair, maintenance, and equipment for dam, reservoir, or irrigation system improvements; provided that no funds shall be made available from the agricultural development and food security special fund under this Act unless private revenues are provided to match the funds made available from the agricultural development and food security special fund under this Act; provided further that the priority of projects shall be based on the following criteria:
     (1)  Dams or reservoirs with a classification of "high hazard", as defined in section 179D-3, Hawaii Revised Statutes; or
     (2)  Dams or reservoirs with a high degree of existing or potential dam or reservoir safety improvements pursuant to Phase I or Phase II investigations.
     SECTION 3.  The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of finance for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  Statutory material to be repealed is bracketed and stricken.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agricultural Development and Food Security Special Fund
 
Description:
Expands the authorized uses of the agricultural development and food security special fund to include the improvement and investigative studies of dams and reservoirs.  Authorizes director of finance to issue general obligation bonds for the special fund.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
