HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
867
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO HEALTHY INITIATIVES.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that Hawaii's farmers face numerous challenges in earning a living off the land.  On average, the farmer's share of every food dollar has dropped below 19 cents, and in Hawaii, it is even less.  Although the 2007 Census of Agriculture for Hawaii indicates that there are more farms than in 2002, the land in agriculture and average farm size has decreased, and the average age of farmers in Hawaii is higher than the national average.
     The legislature further finds that food safety certification is a critical component of any healthy initiative to expand the sale and consumption of Hawaii-grown produce.  In addition to schools, hotels, restaurants, and others in the tourism industry often seek to buy as much local produce as they can, and the demand for food safety certification has increased and is required by visitor industry restaurants.  This requirement has limited the procurement of Hawaii-grown produce.
     The purpose of this Act is to expand the sale and consumption of Hawaii-grown produce by establishing a safe food certification pilot program to benefit farmers and consumers statewide.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established in the department of agriculture a safe food certification pilot program to benefit farmers and consumers throughout the State.
     (b)  The pilot program shall be managed by the department of agriculture; provided that the department of health shall provide the department of agriculture with assistance as necessary in implementing the pilot program.  The pilot program shall:
     (1)  Encourage farmers to form agricultural cooperatives;
     (2)  Coordinate purchasing agreements between the agricultural cooperatives and schools, hotels, restaurants, and other buyers; and
     (3)  Develop and implement "safe" food certification for products under the pilot program to promote fresh, high-quality produce grown by Hawaii farmers.
All farmers operating in the State shall be eligible to apply for the pilot program.
     (c)  The department of agriculture shall report to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the regular sessions of 2012 and 2013 on the status of the pilot program and recommendations, including any recommendations for legislation and funding, to make permanent the safe food certification pilot program.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the tourism special fund the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 and such sum shall be transferred to the department of agriculture to establish and administer the safe food certification pilot program established in this Act.
     SECTION 4.  There is appropriated from the interdepartmental appropriation transferred from the Hawaii tourism authority the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 for the department of agriculture to establish and administer the safe food certification pilot program established in this Act.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 5.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011; provided that this Act shall be repealed on June 30, 2013.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Farmers; Safe Food Certification; Pilot Project; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes a pilot program within the department of agriculture to encourage farmers to form agricultural cooperatives, coordinate purchasing agreements between the agricultural cooperatives and hotels, restaurants, and other buyers in the visitor and hospitality industries, and develop and implement safe food certification for products under the pilot program; requires annual reports to the legislature; appropriates funds.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
