HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
864
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE CLEAN AND SOBER HOME AND HALFWAY HOUSE TASK FORCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that clean and sober homes and halfway houses are an integral step in the treatment of individuals recently released from incarceration and with substance abuse issues.  Persons released from incarceration especially need the support of a home environment while trying to deal with the stressors of reintegrating back into society while maintaining sobriety.  The legislature also finds that there is a community concern regarding having these homes in their immediate vicinity, and their concerns must be tempered with the needs of the individuals requiring support.
     The purpose of this Act is to establish a task force to determine how clean and sober homes and halfway houses may be regulated, while still meeting all laws protecting people with disabilities.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There is established the clean and sober home and halfway house task force within the department of health for administrative purposes.
     (b)  The clean and sober home and halfway house task force shall consist of the following members:
     (1)  Two members to be appointed by the governor;
     (2)  Two members of the senate, to be appointed by the president of the senate;
     (3)  Two members of the house of representatives, to be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;
     (4)  The attorney general or the attorney general's designee;
     (5)  The administrator of the alcohol and drug abuse division of the department of health or the administrator's designee;
     (6)  The director of the city and county of Honolulu's department of planning and permitting or the director's designee;
     (7)  One member from the Hawaii Substance Abuse Coalition;
     (8)  One member from a legal representative of a disabilities organization;
     (9)  One member from the coalition for clean and sober homes; and
    (10)  One member from Oxford House, Inc.
     (c)  The task force shall:
     (1)  Address the health, safety, and welfare of individuals placed in clean and sober homes or halfway houses;
     (2)  Address the needs and concerns of the communities in which the clean and sober homes or halfway houses are located;
     (3)  Develop procedures and protocols for making clean and sober homes and halfway houses accountable, yet not requiring formal licensure; and
     (4)  Ensure that all recommendations are in compliance with federal and state housing laws for persons with disabilities.
     (d)  The members of the task force shall select the chairperson of the task force from among themselves.  Members of the task force shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the performance of their official duties.
     (e)  The task force shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the legislature no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the 2012 regular session.

     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Clean and Sober Homes and Halfway Houses; Task Force
 
Description:
Establishes a task force, within the department of health, to regulate clean and sober homes and halfway houses.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
