HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
920
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE LONG-TERM AGRICULTURAL LEASE TASK FORCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that small farmers and locally-based agricultural enterprises are essential partners in achieving the State's goal of increased food sustainability in the State.  Small farmers and agricultural enterprises face many challenges, including limitations on lease terms that affect their ability to pursue innovative solutions in the field of diversified agriculture.  The legislature finds that providing support to the State's small farmers and agricultural enterprises serves the interest of the State in achieving food sustainability.
     SECTION 2.  (a)  There shall be established within the department of agriculture for administrative purposes a long-term agricultural lease task force.  The task force shall develop a plan and make recommendations to expand the availability of long-term leases favorable to small farms and agricultural enterprises in order to improve community investments in long-term food sustainability in the State. 
     (b)  The long-term agricultural lease task force shall meet at times and in locations determined by its members; provided that the task force shall meet a minimum of five times between July 1, 2011, and December 1, 2011.  The task force may continue to meet beyond December 1, 2011, if necessary.  The task force shall be dissolved on June 30, 2012.
     (c)  The department of agriculture shall provide administrative support to the long-term agricultural lease task force.
     (d)  The task force shall be composed of the following members:
     (1)  The chairperson of the board of land and natural resources, or the chairperson's designee;
     (2)  The chairperson of the board of agriculture or the chairperson's designee;
     (3)  The president of the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation;
     (4)  Two additional representatives from the Hawaii Farm Bureau Federation;
     (5)  The president of the Hawai‘i Farmers Union;
     (6)  Three additional representatives from the Hawai‘i Farmers Union;
     (7)  The president of the Hawaii Cattlemen's Council; and
     (8)  One additional representative from the Hawaii Cattlemen's Council.
     Members of the task force shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for travel expenses incurred in traveling from one island to another in the performance of their official duties.
     (e)  The task force shall select from among its members a chairperson and any other officers it deems necessary.
     (f)  The task force shall submit a report to the legislature documenting its progress, reporting its allowable travel expenses, and making recommendations for legislation to address the issue of food sustainability no later than twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 to support the purpose and objectives of the long-term agricultural lease task force including:
     (1)  Convening and operating the task force, including travel expenses for members who travel from one island to another to attend meetings; and
     (2)  Preparing the report submitted to the legislature.
     The sum appropriated shall be expended by the department of agriculture for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Agricultural Leases; Task Force; Appropriation
 
Description:
Establishes the long-term agricultural lease task force in the department of agriculture; makes appropriation.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
