HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
933
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Traffic congestion on the State's roads and highways has severe detrimental impacts on the economy and the quality of life of Hawaii's residents.  The statewide population growth, along with the resulting demand for residential development, has substantially contributed to the State's traffic concerns.  Ensuring that roads are built before the construction of residential developments will help avoid the gridlock that has already affected various communities.
     The legislature notes that a state constitutional amendment was introduced in the 2011 Regular Session that would allow special purpose revenue bonds to be issued and used to assist developers to provide infrastructure, including highway improvements.  The legislature finds that this would dramatically speed up the process of funding needed roads and infrastructure throughout the State.
     The purpose of this Act is to require responsible county agencies, as a condition precedent to the issuance of any grubbing, grading, or building permit for any residential development, to certify that all highways that are or will be contiguous to the residential development have been completed or are under construction.
     SECTION 1.  Chapter 46, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§46-     Highway development, residential developments.  (a)  As a condition precedent to the issuance of any grubbing, grading, or building permit for any portion or phase of a residential development, the county agency responsible for issuing the permit shall certify on the permit that all county and state highways that are or will be contiguous to the residential development have been completed or are under construction at the time of issuance of the permit.
     (b)  For purposes of this section:
     "Residential development" means any development that comprises over         residential units.
     "Residential unit" includes single-family, duplex, and multi-family units."
     SECTION 2.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Counties; Residential Development
 
Description:
Requires the responsible county agency, as a condition precedent to the issuance of any grubbing, grading, or building permit for any residential development, to certify that all highways that are or will be contiguous to the residential development have been completed or are under construction.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
