HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
943
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  Current law provides for an initial mandatory ethics training course for legislators, elected members of the board of education, trustees of the office of Hawaiian affairs, the governor, the lieutenant governor, and executive department heads and deputies.  However, there is no provision for mandatory continuing ethics training.
     The legislature finds that continuous ethics training on an annual basis is necessary to ensure the integrity of conduct of elected officials and certain appointed officers.  According to the National Conference of State Legislatures, the following states offer online interactive ethics training or post ethics manuals or related materials online:  California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, and Texas.
     The purpose of this Act is to require mandatory continuing ethics education for elected officials and certain appointed officers of the State.
     SECTION 2.  Chapter 84, Hawaii Revised Statutes, is amended by adding a new section to part V to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
     "§84‑     Mandatory continuing ethics training course.  (a)  All state officers and employees enumerated in section 84‑41 who have completed an initial mandatory ethics training course under section 84-42 shall complete a continuing ethics training course at least once every two years after the individual's initial election or initial appointment, as applicable, if the individual remains with the State as an officer or employee.
     (b)  The continuing ethics training course shall be administered by the state ethics commission and shall be offered online and on demand, beginning June 1, 2012.
     (c)  The continuing ethics training course shall include an updated review of the information covered in the initial ethics training course under section 84-43, and information concerning:
     (1)  Advisory opinions issued within the two-year period immediately preceding the course; and
     (2)  Any other information that addresses current ethics issues as determined by the executive director of the state ethics commission.
The continuing ethics training course shall allow for the inclusion of typed-in email questions from each attendee, addressed to the executive director of the state ethics commission; provided that the questions shall not be deemed to constitute a request for an advisory opinion.  The executive director shall reply appropriately.
     (d)  The executive director of the state ethics commission shall make a record of each person who completes the mandatory continuing ethics training course, which record shall constitute a public record.
     (e)  Completion of the mandatory continuing ethics training course under this section:
     (1)  Shall not be deemed to diminish personal responsibility for adherence to this chapter; and
     (2)  Shall not be used or admitted into evidence in any proceeding against the person completing any continuing ethics training course.
     (f)  As used in this section:
     "Email" means electronic mail that is a store-and-forward method of writing, sending, receiving, and sending messages over a computer network.
     "On demand" means the capability of being instantly accessed over the Internet.
     "Online" means the delivery of a learning, training, or education program over the Internet by the use of a computer."
     SECTION 3.  New statutory material is underscored.
     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect upon its approval.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 


 
Report Title:
Online Ethics Training; Mandatory Continuing Education
 
Description:
Requires continuing online ethics training for elected officials, elected members of the board of education, trustees of the office of Hawaiian affairs, the governor, lieutenant governor, and executive department heads and deputies.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
