HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
951
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO SCHOOL REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that the backlog of repair and maintenance projects in public schools continues to be of concern and that all means of addressing the problem should be explored and supported.
     The legislature further finds that Hawaii 3R's has saved the State money by completing repair and maintenance projects at public schools - repairs that ordinarily would be done with only State funds and resources.  Hawaii 3R's generates savings for the State by leveraging state grant funds with federal funds, private donations, and volunteerism or "sweat equity" from various community organizations and businesses.
     Since its inception in 2001, Hawaii 3R's has saved the State an estimated $36,700,000.  This figure is determined by taking the State's official estimated cost of the repair and maintenance projects completed in Hawaii 3R's projects ($39,600,000) and subtracting the amount of state grant funds expended to support Hawaii 3R's ($2,900,000).  This means that for every $1 invested in Hawaii 3R's by the State, over $12 worth of work is completed.  It is also noteworthy that Hawaii 3R's has statewide reach, with five hundred three grants awarded to one hundred seventy-five different schools on the islands of Oahu, Maui, Molokai, Lanai, Kauai, and Hawaii.
     The legislature acknowledges that Hawaii 3R's also has built a partnership with the Joint Venture Education Forum, a partnership between the department of education and the United States Pacific Command.  This relationship benefits not only military-impacted or military-partnered schools but all of Hawaii's public schools through increased military partnerships. Through Joint Venture Education Forum (i.e., federal) funding, Hawaii 3R's can provide grants to over one hundred military­impacted, dependent, partnered schools.
     The legislature is encouraged by the level of support that the community has given to Hawaii 3R's and, more importantly, to the public schools.  Skilled and unskilled volunteer labor from private businesses, the military, civic clubs, churches, teachers, parents, and students, combined with donations from community businesses and foundations, have all contributed to the success of Hawaii 3R's.  In addition, Hawaii's trade unions and associations have been lending invaluable support.  Overall, over 2,500 people have provided over 10,000 hours of volunteer labor.
     The legislature understands that it is necessary to continue to provide state funding to support Hawaii 3R's and to fund grants that cannot be funded through Hawaii 3R's other funding sources, especially given the uncertainty of the availability of federal funds in the future.  Hawaii 3R's has proven to be a worthy means to invest in the condition of public school facilities and to promote community involvement.  Hawaii 3R's has proven to be an efficient organization by keeping administrative costs below ten per cent of overall expenses.
     The legislature finds that Hawaii 3R's serves the public purpose and the purpose of this Act is to support the continuation of this valuable work by appropriating public funds to Hawaii 3R's to expedite the repair and maintenance of Hawaii's public schools.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $400,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to deposit into the Hawaii 3R's school repair and maintenance fund under section 302A-1502.4, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
     SECTION 3.  There is appropriated out of the Hawaii 3R's school repair and maintenance fund the sum of $400,000 or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 as a grant pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes, to Hawaii 3R's.
     The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of education for the purposes of this Act.
     SECTION 4.  If any provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the Act, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Act are severable.
     SECTION 5.  It is the intent of this Act to neither jeopardize the receipt of any federal aid nor impair the obligation of the State or any agency thereof to the holders of any bond issued by the State or by any such agency, and to the extent, and only to the extent, necessary to effectuate this intent, the governor may modify the strict provisions of this Act, but shall promptly report any such modification with reasons therefore to the legislature at its next session thereafter for review by the legislature.
     SECTION 6.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Schools; Hawaii 3R's; Appropriation
 
Description:
Appropriates moneys to the Hawaii 3R's as a grant pursuant to chapter 42F, Hawaii Revised Statutes.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
