HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
950
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
MAKING AN APPROPRIATION FOR HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that health information technology provides the overall framework for the comprehensive management and secure exchange of health information among providers, insurers, governments, and consumers.  The use of health information technology also has the potential to improve health care quality, prevent medical errors, increase administrative efficiencies, decrease paperwork, and improve patient care throughout the State of Hawaii by providing complete, accurate, and searchable health information at the point of diagnosis and care.  The federal Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act has created a number of funding opportunities to advance health information technology through the use of federal matching grant programs aimed at helping states design and develop health information technology systems.  The legislature also finds that participation in these federal matching grant programs will be beneficial to the overall health of the residents of the State.
     The purpose of this Act is to appropriate funds to the department of health to participate in any federal matching grant programs authorized by the federal Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act with respect to health information technology systems.
     SECTION 2.  There is appropriated out of the general revenues of the State of Hawaii the sum of $           or so much thereof as may be necessary for the fiscal year 2011-2012 and the same sum or so much thereof as may be necessary for fiscal year 2012-2013 to be used by the department of health for participation in any federal matching grant programs authorized by the federal Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act with respect to the design or development of health information technology systems.  To effectuate the purposes of this Act, the department of health shall comply with all program-specific requirements and timetables set forth by the federal Health Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act and any federal agency charged with implementing the federal matching grant programs.
     SECTION 3.  The sums appropriated shall be expended by the department of health for the purposes of this Act.

     SECTION 4.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Appropriation; Health Information Technology; Federal Matching Grants
 
Description:
Appropriates funds to the department of health to participate in federal matching grant programs associated with the development of health information technologies.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
