HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.B. NO.
993
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2011
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
 
A BILL FOR AN ACT
 
 
RELATING TO THE HAWAII MARINE HIGHWAY SYSTEM.
 
 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF HAWAII:
 

     SECTION 1.  The legislature finds that residents of the state depend almost exclusively on air transportation when traveling from one island to another.  Transportation by ferry routes, however, remains an alternative, especially as the cost of air transport continues to increase and given the recent turmoil faced by local air carriers.  Technology has also advanced to the point where passenger and cargo water transport can be fast and relatively comfortable.
     The legislature finds that federal funding may become available to assist a state that has a marine highway system in place, such as Alaska.  Alaska has designated a "highway" to include "a ferry system, whether operated solely inside the State or to connect with a Canadian highway, and any such related facility."
     The purpose of this Act is to establish the Hawaii marine highway system to be administered under the department of transportation.
     SECTION 2.  The Hawaii Revised Statutes is amended by adding a new chapter to be appropriately designated and to read as follows:
"CHAPTER
HAWAII MARINE HIGHWAY SYSTEM
     §   ‑1  Hawaii marine highway system; comprehensive long-range plan.  The department of transportation shall develop a comprehensive long-range plan for the development and improvement of the Hawaii marine highway system and shall revise and update that plan at least every five years.  The department shall submit: 
(1)  The long-range comprehensive plan to the legislature at least twenty days prior to the convening of the regular session of 2012; and
(2)  Revisions and updates to the plan to the legislature at least twenty days prior to the convening of each regular session every five years thereafter.
     §   ‑2  Acquisition and maintenance of ferry terminal facilities; rules.  (a)  The department of transportation shall construct, purchase, or lease ferry terminal facilities in Honolulu harbor on the island of Oahu, Nawiliwili harbor on the island of Kauai, Kahului harbor on the island of Maui, and Kawaihae harbor on the island of Hawaii for the loading and unloading of passengers and vehicles under their own power, onto and off ferries.  The department shall repair and maintain such facilities.
     (b)  The department may connect ferry terminal facilities with local highway systems.
     (c)  The department shall adopt rules in accordance with chapter 91 to implement this chapter, including rules to govern the use of ferry terminal facilities by the public and the charging of fees for the use of ferry terminal facilities.
     §   ‑3  Hawaii marine highway system fund.  (a)  There is created the Hawaii marine highway system fund in the State treasury to be administered by the department of transportation into which shall be deposited:
     (1)  The gross revenue of the Hawaii marine highway system;
     (2)  Legislative appropriations to the Hawaii marine highway system fund; and
     (3)  Gifts or grants from any public or private sources, including federal funds.
For the purposes of this section, "gross revenue" means all money, except money refunded to ticket holders and others for unused services, that is generated from the operation of the Hawaii marine highway system, including that derived from vessel operations and use of the Hawaii marine highway system's facilities.
     (b)  The moneys in the Hawaii marine highway system fund shall be expended only for the operation and maintenance of the Hawaii marine highway system."
     SECTION 3.  This Act shall take effect on July 1, 2011.
 
                  INTRODUCED BY:
_____________________________
 
 
 

 
Report Title:
Hawaii Marine Highway System; Establishment
 
Description:
Creates the Hawaii Marine Highway System to be administered by the Department of Transportation (DOT).  Creates the Hawaii Marine Highway System Fund.  Requires DOT to adopt rules.
 
 
 
The summary description of legislation appearing on this page is for informational purposes only and is not legislation or evidence of legislative intent.
