HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
H.C.R. NO.
141
TWENTY-SIXTH LEGISLATURE, 2012
 
STATE OF HAWAII
 
 
 
 
 
HOUSE CONCURRENT
RESOLUTION
 
 
REQUESTING THE DIRECTOR OF COMMERCE AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS TO CONVENE A TASK FORCE ON DOG BREEDING.
 
 
 

     WHEREAS, the residents of Hawaii have the right to purchase healthy dogs raised by responsible breeders; and
 
     WHEREAS, Hawaii is committed to preventing dogs from being housed in overcrowded, unhealthy, and inhumane breeding facilities; and
 
     WHEREAS, dog breeding facilities with unsanitary conditions, similar to those discovered at the Bradley International Waimanalo operation in February of 2011, create the potential for soil and groundwater contamination, the spread of zoonotic parasites and diseases, and the sale of sick or dying animals to the public; and
 
     WHEREAS, S.B. 1522, S.D. 1, H.D. 1 (2011), proposed to require the licensing of large-scale commercial dog breeders to ensure that every dog under their care is provided with sufficient food, water, space, and adequate shelter from the elements, necessary veterinarian care, and regular exercise, among other things; and
 
WHEREAS, the Auditor was requested, in S.C.R. 111, S.D. 1 (2011), to perform a sunrise analysis on S.B. 1522, S.D. 1, H.D. 1 (2011); and
 
     WHEREAS, the Auditor performed a sunrise analysis and in Report Number 11-02 found:
 
     (1)  That the proponents of S.B. 1522, S.D.1, H.D. 1 (2011), failed to demonstrate a need for regulation as defined by the sunrise law;
 
     (2)  That S.B. 1522, S.D. 1, H.D. 1 (2011), is flawed; and
 
     (3)  There are available alternatives to protect dogs; and
 
WHEREAS, the American Kennel Club reported that in 2011, one hundred twenty-eight licensed and sanctioned dog events were held in the State in which 8,130 dogs participated; and
 
WHEREAS, the American Kennel Club estimates that purebred dogs generate $3,600,000 in annual spending in Hawaii; and
 
WHEREAS, members of the Hawaiian Kennel Club, various sporting and performance dog clubs, and Hawaii dog fanciers should participate in drafting legislation to prevent animal abuse and puppy mills based upon their expertise and experience in the breeding and training of dogs; now, therefore,
 
     BE IT RESOLVED by the House of Representatives of the Twenty-sixth Legislature of the State of Hawaii, Regular Session of 2012, the Senate concurring, that the Director of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is requested to establish a dog breeding task force for the purposes of preventing future instances of animal cruelty by large-scale commercial dogs breeders and protecting the public from purchasing sick and unhealthy dogs; and
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Director of Commerce and Consumer Affairs, or the Director's designee, is requested to serve as the chairperson and to request interested parties to be members of the task force, including:
 
     (1)  One member appointed by the President of the Senate;
 
     (2)  One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives;
 
     (3)  Three members representing organizations providing shelter and rescue services to dogs;
 
     (4)  Three members representing dog fanciers;
 
     (5)  One member representing pet stores that sell dogs;
 
     (6)  One member representing veterinarians who provide medical services to dogs; and
 
     (7)  One member representing a county prosecuting attorney's office; and
 
     BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Director of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is requested to convene the task force immediately upon the adoption of this measure and to terminate its proceedings on June 30, 2013; and
 
     BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the task force is requested to consider whether revised legislation or other alternatives will prevent future cases of animal cruelty; and
 
BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that that the Director of Commerce and Consumer Affairs is requested to submit a report of the task force's findings and recommendations, including any proposed legislation, to the Legislature not less than twenty days prior to the convening of the Regular Session of 2013; and
 
     BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that a certified copy of this Concurrent Resolution be transmitted to the Director of Commerce and Consumer Affairs.
 
 
 
 
OFFERED BY:
_____________________________
 
 

